COMMISSIONER
HESS&apos;S HERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON HERE
FROM ANN ARBOR, LIEUTENANT MIKE
SURABI REMOTELY FROM TYRONE
TOWNSHIP.
VERY GOOD CHEER KLEINMAN WE DO
HAVE SOME GREAT THANK YOU SO.
NEXT UP, WE&apos;RE GOING TO DO THE
APPROVAL OF THE CONSENT AGENDA
BUT I HAVE A MODIFICATION TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA WHICH IS
THAT I WANT TO MAKE A
MODIFICATION OF TONIGHT&apos;S
AGENDA.
SO I BELIEVE WHAT I DO NOW IS
I&apos;M GOING TO MAKE A MOTION TO
REMOVE TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA FROM
THE CONSENT AGENDA BECAUSE I
WANT TO AMEND TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA.
OK, IS THERE A MOTION TO REMOVE
THE AGENDA FROM THE CONSENT
AGENDA?
I SEE COMMISSIONER BOLLON AND
SECONDED FROM COMMISSIONER
BRABIN ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HANDS,
ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
OK, MOTION PASSES SO NOW WE
HAVE AN AMENDED CONSENT AGENDA.
SO NOW I NEED A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
AMENDED CHURCHWOMEN IF YOU
COULD SAY WHAT THE AMENDMENT IS
THOUGH I DON&apos;T THINK WITH THAT.
&gt;&gt; OH I DO.
DO WE APPROVE THE CONSENT?
&gt;&gt; IT WILL BE OH SO IS YOUR
CONSENT TO GENDER.
&gt;&gt; OK I&apos;M SORRY.
&gt;&gt; OK YEAH OK THE WHOLE
PROCEDURE THING HAS NEVER BEEN
MY STRONG SUIT.
OK SO I NEED A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
AMENDED.
COMMISSIONER ROVEN AND SECONDED
FROM VALDERRAMA.
OK ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HANDS ALL
THOSE OPPOSED OK SO A CONSENT
AGENDA PASSES AS AMENDED NOW
WE&apos;RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD LIKE TO REMOVE THE
DISCUSSION OF CITY COUNCIL
TRANSPORTATION ISSUES FROM THE
AGENDA BOTH BECAUSE
COMMISSIONER OR COUNCIL MEMBER
IS NOT HERE TONIGHT AND I THINK
SHE WAS THE ONE WHO ASKED THIS
QUESTION.
I THINK SHE&apos;D WANT TO BE HERE
FOR THE DISCUSSION ALSO WE&apos;VE
HAD A COUPLE OF LATE ADDITIONS
TO THE AGENDA AND SO IT&apos;S GOING
TO BE A FULL NIGHT AND I WOULD
LIKE TO HAVE MORE BREATHING
ROOM FOR THIS CONVERSATION AND
I WOULD LIKE COUNCILOR RUBIX TO
BE SO CAN I MAKE A MOTION I
NEVER MADE A MOTION OF THE
CHAIR.
I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE TO AMEND THE
AGENDA TO REMOVE CITY COUNCIL
TRANSPORTATION ISSUES FROM
TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA.
SO I GUESS TO POSTPONE IT I
WE&apos;LL PROBABLY TALK ABOUT NEXT
MONTH.
CAN I GET A SECOND COMMISSIONER
BOEHLAND ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
RAISE YOUR PHYSICALLY RAISE
YOUR ALL THOSE OPPOSED OK
AGENDA PASSES AS AMENDED THEIR
AGENDA PASSES AS AMENDED.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU EVERYONE.
NOW WE ARE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES.
RAYMOND, ARE YOU DOING THE TIME
OR AM I DOING THE TIMER?
&gt;&gt; I CAN DO THE TIMER.
IT LOOKS LIKE YOU&apos;RE TRYING TO
STILL FIGURE OUT A LOT
OF THINGS.
I&apos;LL DO THE TIMER.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, IF YOU WOULDN&apos;T MIND.
THANK YOU TO SPEAKER PUBLIC
COMMENT PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX
THREE THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN
TWO THREE AND ENTER MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO
THREE TWO EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO.
SO STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER IN ORDER
TO RAISE YOUR HAND PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE YOU
WILL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK AND
THAT&apos;S THE INSTRUCTIONS IT
SOUNDS LIKE WE DO HAVE SOME
CALLERS TONIGHT.
&gt;&gt; WE DO INDEED.
AND I ALSO DENHA CITIZEN HAS
JOINED US SO HOPEFULLY WE ARE
GOOD TO GO.
&gt;&gt; SO MAYBE WE GOT SOME WE WERE
SUCCESSFUL AFTER ALL.
ONE OF THE THING I DO WANT TO
NOTE IN LAST MONTH&apos;S MEETING
THERE WAS A TYPO ON THE CALL
AND SO MY APOLOGIES TO ANY
OF THE CALLERS WHO MAY HAVE
TRIED LAST MONTH THAT HAS SINCE
BEEN CORRECTED.
IT WAS IT WAS CORRECT IN ABOUT
FOUR PLACES BUT IT WAS WRONG IN
ONE PLACE.
SO UNFORTUNATELY PEOPLE ARE
USING THE WRONG NUMBER.
THEY WOULD HAVE HAD DIFFICULTY
DIALING IN.
BUT IT LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE
SUCCESS TONIGHT BECAUSE WE HAVE
SEVERAL.
SO THE FIRST CALLER WITH PHONE
NUMBER ENDING IN THREE FOUR
ZERO.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE ALLOWED YOU TO TALK
GO AHEAD AND MEET YOURSELF AND
THE FLOOR IS YOURS
.
LOOKS LIKE YOU&apos;RE STILL MUTED.
&gt;&gt; WHAT ARE THE INSTRUCTIONS
FOR MUTING?
I THINK IT&apos;S STAR SIX ON ZOOME
WILL UNU YOU CAN OLAR WITH
THREE FOUR ZERO IF YOU CAN
UNMUTED THE FLOOR IS YOURS
.
SOUNDS LIKE THEY MAY BE HAVING
SOME DIFFICULTY WHY DON&apos;T WE
MOVE ON TO THE NEXT CALLER AND
WE&apos;LL COME BACK TO THREE FOUR
ZERO TO TRY AND MAKE SURE WE
GET EVERYONE AND YES SO NOW WE
WILL MOVE ON TO CALLER WITH THE
LAST THREE DIGITS FIVE EIGHT
EIGHT I HAVE ALLOWED YOU TO
TALK GO AHEAD YOURSELF BEFORE
COMPUTERS.
&gt;&gt; HI.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, HI EVERYONE.
THANKS FOR THE OPPORTUNITY TO
SPEAK TONIGHT.
I&apos;M PETER HOUCK, A RESIDENT ON
YEOMAN COURT.
I&apos;M CALLING AGAIN TONIGHT ABOUT
THE PLAN FOR RESURFACING AND
ADDING SOME EXTRA SIDE CHURCH
ROAD AS YOU&apos;VE HEARD ME SAY
BEFORE, I&apos;M CONCERNED THAT THE
RECKLESS DRIVING ON SOCIAL AND
THE FREQUENT MISUSE OF THE
CENTER TURN LANE MIGHT LEAD TO
CRASHES OF PEDESTRIANS IN THE
NEW CROSSWALKS AS THEY ARE
CURRENTLY DESIGNED.
BUT I THINK THERE ARE WAYS TO
MAKE THIS ROAD BETTER.
INCLUDED IN YOUR READING LIST
THIS MONTH WAS AN EMAIL THAT I
SENT PROPOSING AN ALTERNATIVE
LAYOUT FOR THE CROSSWALK AT
CHURCHILL.
IF WE MOVE IT TO THE WEST SIDE
OF CHURCHILL THEN ADDING A
REFUGE ISLAND SEEMS MUCH MORE
VIABLE WITHOUT CAUSING UNDUE
INCONVENIENCE DURING LEFT TURNS
IN THIS EXAMPLE IF WE DON&apos;T GET
THE DESIGN RIGHT WE ARE GOING
TO BE LOCKED IN WITH FACILITIES
THAT AREN&apos;T AS EFFECTIVE AND
SAFE AS THEY COULD BE AND WILL
BE VERY DIFFICULT FOR US TO
CHANGE LATER ON IN FEBRUARY I
STARTED A FACEBOOK GROUP FOR
NEARBY RESIDENTS AND OTHER
USERS OF SCIORRA CHURCH AS A
FORUM FOR DISCUSSION ABOUT THIS
UPCOMING PROJECT.
WE ALREADY HAVE 48 MEMBERS
INCLUDING A NEW ONE WHO JUST
JOINED TODAY DISCUSSION IN THAT
GROUP HAS AFFIRMED THE NEED FOR
SOME ACTION TO CURTAIL BAD
DRIVING BEHAVIORS AND IT&apos;S ALSO
BROUGHT UP SOME OTHER REALLY
GOOD ALTERNATIVE IDEAS.
ONE IDEA IS MOVING AT
CROSSWALKS FURTHER FROM THE
INTERSECTIONS SO THE ISLANDS
CAN BE ADDED WITHOUT INHIBITING
LEFT TURNS.
ANOTHER PROPOSAL IS COMBINING
THE BIKE LANES INTO A SINGLE
BIDIRECTIONAL TRACK WHICH WOULD
TAKE LESS ROOM THEREBY LEAVING
WIDTH THAT CAN BE USED FOR
REFUGE ISLAND.
ANOTHER IDEA IS ADDING ISLANDS
AWAY FROM THE INTERSECTIONS.
THEY WOULDN&apos;T BE REFUGE ISLANDS
BUT THEY WOULD MAKE PASSING IN
THE CENTER LANE MUCH LESS
ATTRACTIVE TO IMPATIENT DRIVERS
LIKE THE PROPOSAL I SHARED WITH
YOU BY EMAIL.
THESE IDEAS ALL WORK BETTER IF
WE DESIGN FOR THEM NOW INSTEAD
OF TRYING TO WORK THEM IN LATER
SUMMARIZED THESE IDEAS IN AN
UPDATED PRESENTATION DOCUMENT
THAT I WILL EMAIL TO YOU AND
HOPEFULLY EACH OF YOU SHOULD
GET IT NOW I DON&apos;T KNOW WHICH
OF THESE IDEAS WOULD BE
FEASIBLE OR WHICH WOULD BE BEST
BUT IT&apos;S OBVIOUS TO ME THAT
THERE ARE OPTIONS OUT THERE TO
MAKE OUR ROAD MUCH SAFER FOR
PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLISTS AND
DRIVERS.
IT&apos;S ALSO OBVIOUS TO ME THAT WE
HAVE MANY PEOPLE IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD WHO ARE ENGAGED
AND WHO ARE EAGER FOR
IMPROVEMENTS.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;D LIKE TO URGE THIS
TEAM TO KEEP CHURCH TOP OF MIND
WHEN LOOKING FOR OPPORTUNITIES
TO ACHIEVE THE AMBITIOUS
INFRASTRUCTURE GOALS THAT WE
HAVE SET FOR OURSELVES IN OUR
NEW TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
PLEASE LET&apos;S GET THESE FEATURES
INTO THE DESIGN SOONER RATHER
THAN LATER.
THIS IS THE BIGGEST CHANGE TO
SITE CHURCH ROAD IN THE TWENTY
PLUS YEARS THAT I&apos;VE LIVED
NEARBY.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS A ONCE IN A
GENERATION OPPORTUNITY TO BRING
THIS ROAD UP TO MODERN
STANDARDS FOR MULTIMODAL
TRANSPORTATION.
THANK THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; THAT WAS A PERFECT PERFECTLY
THREE MINUTES WHO DO WE HAVE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS SO MUCH.
DO WE HAVE NEXT?
ALL RIGHT NEXT WE HAVE WE WILL
GO BACK TO CALLER ENDING IN
THREE FOUR ZERO.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE ALLOWED YOU TO TALK
GO AHEAD ON YOURSELF AND FOR
YOURS.
OH CALLER THREE FOUR YOU JUST
DROPPED BUT WE WILL MOVE ON TO
CALLER ENDING IN FOUR ZERO
FOUR.
I HAVE ALLOWED YOU TO TALK GO
AHEAD AND ADMIT YOURSELF AND
THE FLOOR IS YOURS
.
HELLO.
HI THERE.
HI.
HELLO.
GREAT THANKS SO MUCH FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TO TALK TONIGHT.
MY NAME IS COLBY GAD AND I&apos;M
PRESIDENT OF ANN ARBOR.
I LIVE ON WILLIAMSBURG ROAD AND
I AM TRAVELING ON THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT I&apos;VE HEARD
IN THE INITIAL MEETINGS THE
LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS ABOUT
TRAFFIC CALMING, LOTS
OF REQUESTS FOR TRAFFIC CALMING
AROUND THE CITY, LOTS
OF STUDIES BEING DONE TO FIND
OUT HOW TO CALM DOWN TRAFFIC
EVEN REMEMBER MISSIONER
MENTIONING THAT WOULD TAKE SIX
YEARS WITH CURRENT FUNDING TO
RESOLVE ALL OF THE REQUESTS FOR
TRAFFIC CALMING BECAUSE THE
VOLUME REQUESTS AND THE COST
OF FILLING ALL THOSE REQUESTS
SOMETHING THAT I&apos;VE WONDERED
ABOUT IN CONNECTION WITH THAT
IS IF THERE&apos;S BEEN ANY
CONSIDERATION OF FILTERED
PERMEABILITY SOLUTIONS KNOW
LOTS OF COMMUNITIES FIND IT
EFFECTIVE TO ENTER BOXES IN THE
ROAD THAT ALLOW PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS THROUGH A SHORT
STRETCH OF ROAD THAT WOULD
PREVENT CARS FROM USING THAT
SAME STRETCH OF ROAD OF SUPER
EFFECTIVE TRAFFIC CALMING FOOD.
A LOT OF WAYS AND CAN BE A
PRETTY MINOR LENIENCE FOR
RESIDENTS TO ONLY BE ABLE TO
USE ONE SIDE OF THE ROAD OFF
OF THE ROAD THAT WE TALK ABOUT
WITH TRAFFIC COMING MEASURES
ARE PRETTY SHORT ROAD AND WITH
SO THE RESIDENTS I FIND IT TO
CREATE A VERY CALM ROAD FOR A
VERY SHORT DRIVE AROUND TO
ACCESS THEIR DRIVEWAYS AND
YEAH, I JUST WONDERED IF IF
THAT&apos;S A SOLUTION THAT&apos;S BEEN
CONSIDERED BECAUSE IT CAN BE
VERY CHEAP AND EASY TO PUT IN
AND REVERSIBLE INTO A DISASTER.
IT COULD SOLVE SOME OF THE
PROBLEMS.
BUT THE THING ABOUT OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS THE
VOLUME OF REQUESTS FOR THIS
STORY BUT THANKS FOR YOUR TIME
AND CONSIDERATION AND FOR ALL
OF YOUR WORK.
THANK YOU.
WE MOSTLY DON&apos;T REPLY TO PUBLIC
COMMENTS BUT THAT IS A SOLUTION
THAT&apos;S IN THE CURRENT THE NEW
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
THAT&apos;S ONE OF THE THINGS
PRESENTED AS AN OPTION AND IT&apos;S
SOMETHING I KEEP PESTERING
RAYMOND ABOUT.
SO MOVING ON TO THE NEXT THE
NEXT CALLER.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT, CALLER, LAST
NUMBERS FOR OUR WEBSITE I HAVE
THREE FOR YOU HAVE BEEN
PERMITTED TO SPEAK.
&gt;&gt; GO AHEAD AND LIMIT YOURSELF
IN THE FLOOR.
IS YOURS THINK MY NAME IS TOM
STOLLBERG.
I&apos;M CALLING FROM LOWERTOWN IN
ANN ARBOR.
YOU&apos;VE GOT A LOT ON YOUR AGENDA
TONIGHT.
&gt;&gt; I WON&apos;T TALK ABOUT ALL OF IT
.
&gt;&gt; ONE OF THE THINGS THAT&apos;S ON
THERE IS THE LOWER MOBILITY
STUDY THAT WENT ON FOR A COUPLE
OF YEARS.
I FOLLOWED THAT CLOSELY AND
PARTICIPATED FROM START TO
FINISH AND WE&apos;D REALLY LIKE TO
COMPLIMENT THE CONSULTANTS THAT
WORKED ON THAT AND OUR STAFF
PLANNER LUKE VIEW I THINK THEY
DID AN EXCELLENT JOB IN BOTH
ENGAGING WITH THE PUBLIC AND
RUNNING THEIR MEETINGS AND THE
DETAILED FIELD WORK THAT THEY
DID.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;VE STARTED TO READ IT&apos;S
PRETTY THICK A LOT IN THERE SO
I KNOW THEY PROVIDED SOME
OPTIONS AND NOT JUST SINGLE
SOLUTIONS AS WELL FROM WHAT I&apos;M
NOTING THAT FINAL REPORT.
SO I AGAIN I JUST WANT TO
COMPLIMENT THE TEAM THAT DID
THE WORK ON THIS IN TERMS OF A
COUPLE OTHER THINGS I JUST
MENTIONED THE TRAIN STATION AS
SOMEBODY WHO TOOK AMTRAK BACK
TO CHICAGO A LOT PRICKLED AND I
HAVE FAMILY THERE STILL ON THE
STATION IS WONDERFULLY LOCATED
WHERE IT&apos;S AT WITH THE REST
OF TOWN MOVING RAPIDLY TOWARDS
WHERE THE STATION IS.
THIS IS MY PART OF TOWN I WALK
NEAR THERE ARE VERY FREE ALMOST
DAILY.
YOU CAN ALL GET ALONG WITH
PEOPLE WHO CAN WALK TO THAT
TRAIN OR TAKE A SHORT BIT
OF TRANSIT TO GET THERE IN THE
CURRENT LOCATION WE HAVE A
MASSIVE DEVELOPMENT COMING
RIGHT ON THE BROADWAY BRIDGE
ACROSS THE TRACKS THERE WITH
ONE HUNDRED CONDOS COMING AND A
LOT OF PUBLIC AMENITIES AND A
HOTEL AND ADDITIONALLY SOME
ADDITIONAL CONNECTIONS AND
PATHWAYS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
THERE IN ADDITION TO PAVILION
AN ICE SKATING RINK AND THERE&apos;S
THE LIVERY FOR OUR CONDOS THAT
ARE BEING THAT WERE ALREADY
APPROVED ON MAIN STREET, MAYBE
20 OF THEM RIGHT NEAR THEIR WE
HAVE THE TRAIN TRAIL CONNECTING
WITH THE BORDER, A BORDER TRAIL
RIGHT AT THAT LOCATION AND WITH
THE NEW STAR TUNNEL THAT WAS
UNDERNEATH IT INCLUDED A
PEDESTRIAN HYPOS TUNNEL THAT&apos;S
HEAVILY USED.
NOW WE HAVE SEVEN TWENTY ONE OR
MAIN STREET WHICH IS A CITY
OWNED PROPERTY THAT&apos;S GOING TO
BE DEVELOPED IN SOME WAY
PROBABLY AS PARK SPACE WITH A
LITTLE BIT OF HOUSING ON PART
OF IT.
&gt;&gt; THERE&apos;S THE OLD COMMUNITY
CENTER THAT&apos;S THERE.
WHAT I&apos;M SAYING IS THAT
DOWNTOWN IS GROWING IN THE
DIRECTION OF THE TIPO STREET
TRAIN STATION AND A REFURBISHED
,EXPANDED REVITALIZED STATION
.
THERE WOULD BE A WONDERFUL
THING TO HAVE SO I HOPE WE CAN
MOVE TOWARDS THAT SOLUTION.
THANK YOU.
ANY MORE CALLERS?
WE DO HAVE ONE LAST CALLER WITH
THEIR HAND RAISED PHONE NUMBER
ENDING IN ONE NINE FOUR.
I HAVE ALLOWED YOU TO SPEAK GO
AHEAD AND MEET YOURSELF AND THE
FLOOR IS YOURS.
HELLO.
HI.
THIS IS RITA MITCHELL CALLING
AND I JUST WANTED TO ASK A
QUESTION WHICH IS ON YOUR
AGENDA.
I CANNOT READ THE CONTENT
AGENDA ITEMS SO IT WOULD BE
INTERESTING TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
THOSE ARE.
BUT THE REASON FOR CALLING
TONIGHT IS TO THANK THE
COMMISSION AND THE CITY FOR
PLACING THE DISCUSSION OF THE
POTENTIAL FOR IMPROVEMENT
BETTER IN OUR STATION WITHIN
THE PUBLIC INCLUDING IN YOUR
AGENDA TONIGHT A RECENT LETTER
THAT WAS SENT FROM CITY TO THE
FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION.
I&apos;M CONCERNED THAT THE LETTER
DESCRIBES SOME SIGNIFICANT WORK
THAT WAS DONE OUTSIDE OF THE
PUBLIC TO MAKE SOME VAGUELY
DESCRIBED CHANGES IN THE
PROJECT THAT WAS DISCONTINUED
BY THE FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION
IN AUGUST TWENTY TWENTY ONE SIX
MONTHS AGO THE CITY&apos;S MESSAGE
TO THE FAA SUGGEST CHANGES TO
MARKEDLY REDUCE THE TRAIN
STATION PARKING THAT HINTS AT
FUTURE PHASES THAT ARE
UNDEFINED TIME ASK COULD THOSE
BE BASED ON A GHOST FRAMEWORK
OF THE PARKING STRUCTURE THAT
WAS WHAT THE FAA DESCRIBED AS
EXCESSIVE?
ONE OF THE POINTS MADE BY THE
FAA DISCONTINUED THE PROJECT
WAS THE CONCERNS RAISED BY THE
COMMUNITY WHO PERSISTENTLY
IGNORED BY THE PROJECT TEAM.
FORTUNATELY, IN THE MOST RECENT
MESSAGE, A PROJECT TEAM AGREED
THAT THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
COMPONENT IS DAVID.
YES, THE LAST PUBLIC DISCUSSION
ON THE PROJECT WAS IN
OCTOBER OF TWENTY SEVENTEEN AND
AT THAT TIME SIXTY WRITTEN
COMMENTS THAT WERE SUBMITTED AT
MEETINGS THAT SUPPORTED THE USE
OF THE DEPOSITORY LOCATION FOR
THE AMTRAK STATION FOR ME THE
REASONS THAT YOU JUST HEARD IF
THE PROJECT IS TO MOVE FORWARD
THIS IS A GREAT TIME TO BE
ALIVE.
ELEVEN YEARS AFTER ITS CREATION
THE ORIGINAL PROJECT IS
OUTDATED.
IT&apos;S A FOSSIL REMNANT TIED TO
OUR USE AND STORAGE BASED ON
EXCESSIVE PARKING THAT IS
INCLUDED IN ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY
ONE DOLLARS PLAN NINETEEN AND
REMOTE WORKING HAD CHANGED THE
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
ADJUSTMENTS ARE NEEDED THAT ARE
BASED ON CURRENT PATTERNS AND
PROJECTIONS OF TRANSPORTATION
THAT MAY CHANGE THE WAY WE DO
THINGS COMPARED TO THE 2011 AND
OTHER POTENTIAL CHANGES THAT
ARE PROPOSED BY THE PROJECT TO
REDUCE THE SIZE OF THE STATION
OR THE PROJECT.
IT&apos;S NOT REALLY EASY TO TELL
PEOPLE STREET LOCATION MONEY
MAKES UP THE NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY AND VISITORS PEOPLE
STREET DEFINITELY HAS GREATER
OPPORTUNITIES TO SERVE TRANSIT
ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT.
THE ECOMMERCE AND HOUSING IS
LOCATION THAT TRAILER PARK I
LOOK FORWARD TO GETTING OUT FOR
ALL OF US GETTING CREATIVE AND
WORKING TOWARD THE FUTURE TO
INTEGRATE THE BIG PICTURE
OF PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION TO PUT
THE COMMUNITY IN THE TIME
OF OUR CLIMATE CRISIS.
WE DON&apos;T HAVE THE FINANCIAL
BUDGET OR THE CARBON EMISSION
BUDGET TO CONSTRUCT THIS
SEMESTER STRUCTURED OUR CARS.
THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
WILL BE DIFFERENT.
ELECTRIC VEHICLES OF ALL TYPES
SHOULD BE ON THE MOVE
CONSTANTLY WITH PEOPLE ON THEM
NOT STORED AND STRUCTURED OR
EVEN IN PERSONAL GARAGES.
WE NEED A PLAN THAT WILL
SUPPORT PEOPLE AND THE PLANET
AND OUR CARING AND OTHER.
I LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
YOU.
I&apos;LL THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; ANY MORE CALLERS THAT IS THE
LAST CALLER WITH THEIR HAND UP
AND I THINK EVERYONE ELSE HAS
SPOKEN ALREADY SO I THINK WE
ARE GOOD.
&gt;&gt; GREAT.
THANKS EVERYONE CALLED IN
TONIGHT SO NOW WE ARE GOING TO
MOVE ON TO BUSINESS AND WE&apos;VE
GOT OUR BYLAWS AMENDMENT SO
INCLUDED IN THE PACKET ARE SOME
SUGGESTED CHANGES TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BYLAWS WHICH REFLECT PAST
CHANGES AND ALSO SOME MINOR
CHANGES THAT WERE DISCUSSED AT
THE LAST MEETING.
SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE TAKING A
VOTE ON THESE BYLAW CHANGES
TONIGHT BUT I&apos;M GOING TO GIVE
IT A CHANCE TO WALK US THROUGH
IT FIRST.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, JUST AS A QUICK
REMINDER, WE DISCUSSED THESE
LAST MONTH BY AND LARGE MOST
OF THE AMENDMENTS PROPOSED AS
PART OF THE BYLAWS ARE REALLY
JUST TO LINE PAST ACTION THAT
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
TOOK BACK IN 2018 AND 2019 THAT
REALLY JUST SLIGHTLY CHANGED
THE COMPOSITION OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THEN
BASED ON SOME OF THE FEEDBACK
FROM LAST MONTH, WE ALSO ADDED
SOME LANGUAGE THAT WOULD ALLOW
FOR ALTERNATIVES FOR THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND THE
COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES
AS WELL AS SPECIFICALLY
NOTIFYING THAT OR MENTIONING
THAT DESIGNEES ARE PERMISSIBLE
FOR THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR, THE
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER AND
CHIEF OF POLICE.
SO THAT&apos;S ACTUALLY ALREADY IN
PRACTICE.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR NICK
HUTCHINSON IS HERE ATTENDED
SERVICE HERE FOR CHIEF
OF POLICE AND I JUST STUCK
MYSELF IN THERE AS WELL AS
TRANSPORTATION MANAGER.
SO SO BY AND LARGE WE TRIED TO
REFLECT THE SUGGESTIONS FROM
LAST MONTH TO THIS MONTH AND WE
ARE LOOKING FOR A
RECOMMENDATION FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
TONIGHT.
THIS WOULD HAVE TO GO TO CITY
COUNCIL FOR FINAL ADOPTION.
SO YOU KNOW, YOUR ACTION
TONIGHT WOULD BE A
RECOMMENDATION TO CITY COUNCIL
.
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS,
CONCERNS OR THOUGHTS ABOUT
THESE BYLAW CHANGES WITH YEAH,
WE DID A PRETTY THOROUGH
DISCUSSION AT THE LAST MEETING
SO I&apos;M GOING TO MAKE SURE THAT
EVERYONE HAS TIME TO JUST LIKE
TAKE A QUICK GLANCE IF YOU
HAVEN&apos;T YET AND YOU WANT TO ASK
A QUESTION
, I&apos;M NOT SEEING ANY
HANDS SO I&apos;M GOING TO ASK FOR A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE CHANGES.
OH NO.
I&apos;VE JUST LOST EVERYTHING
APPROVED THE CHANGES TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
BYLAWS AS PRESENTED AND FOR
THEM ON TO CITY COUNCIL FOR
ADOPTION.
I SEE COMMISSIONER BOWLAND AND
CAN I GET A SECOND COMMISSIONER
AND ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HANDS,
ALL THOSE OPPOSED AND ANY
ABSTENTIONS?
I FORGOT ABOUT ABSTENTIONS
BEFORE.
OK, MOTION PASSES THANKS
EVERYONE ON NEXT UP WE HAVE THE
ENFORCEMENT TRANSPARENCY
RESOLUTION.
SO AS I&apos;VE MENTIONED BEFORE I
THE CHAIR OF THE INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION, LISA DR LISA
JACKSON REACHED OUT TO ME AND
TO THE CHAIR OF THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION ON A COUPLE
OF RESOLUTIONS RELATED TO
TRANSPORTATION AND POLICE
ENFORCEMENT.
AND SO THIS I THOUGHT WAS A
RELEVANCE TO THE COMMISSION
BECAUSE IT&apos;S ABOUT AFFECTING
MOBILITY AS WELL AS EQUITY AND
SO YOU WILL HAVE IN YOUR
POCKETS THE PROPOSED RESOLUTION
THAT I THOUGHT WE COULD TAKE
SOME TIME TO DISCUSS AND THEN I
AM ASKING FOR ACTION ITEM SO
THAT WE WOULD PASS THIS
RESOLUTION AND IT WOULD BE
FORWARDED ON TO COUNCIL ALONG
WITH THE RESOLUTION VERSION
OF THE RESOLUTION AND THE HUMAN
RIGHTS COMMISSION VERSION
BASICALLY ASKING FOR
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCESS TO
TRAFFIC STOP DATA.
AND MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT
THIS IS LARGELY DATA THAT THE
ANN ARBOR POLICE DEPARTMENT
ALREADY COLLECTS.
IT&apos;S JUST NOT MADE AVAILABLE TO
A PARK OR OTHER OUTSIDE GROUPS
.
I KNOW SOME OF HER GROUPS HAVE
HOPES TO ASK LIEUTENANT SCHERBA
IF HE HAD ANYTHING HE WANTED TO
ADD ABOUT ANY OF THIS AS A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT NOT TO PUT YOU ON
THE SPOT.
YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO BUT I KNOW
THAT SHE WANTED TO MAKE SURE
THERE WAS TIME FOR YOU TO TO
SHARE ANY THOUGHTS.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME AND
JUST A COUPLE THOUGHTS.
ONE OF THE POLICE IS ABSOLUTELY
INTERESTED IN INCREASING
TRANSPARENCY AND THIS IS A WAY
TO DO THAT FOR SURE.
SO THAT&apos;S CERTAINLY SOMETHING
WE ARE IN FAVOR OF .
THE ONE CALL IT A SPEED BUMP
THAT WE&apos;RE GOING TO RUN INTO IS
AS YOU STATED, THE DEPARTMENT
DOES ALREADY COLLECT PROBABLY
50 TO 60 PERCENT OF THE DATA
THAT WAS ON THAT LIST OR THE
PROPOSAL.
THERE ARE A FEW ITEMS THAT WE
DON&apos;T CURRENTLY DO AND GETTING
THOSE ITEMS STATE IF YOU WANT
TO CALL IT THAT WHERE WE CAN
COLLECT THAT DATA POSES
CHALLENGES BECAUSE WHERE WE
COLLECT THE DATA IS DATA BASE
THAT IS THAT WE DON&apos;T OWN
THAT&apos;S OAKLAND COUNTY.
CLEANTHIS RUNS THIS DATABASE
AND WE&apos;VE BEEN WITH THEM SINCE
ABOUT TWO THOUSAND SEVEN AND
BECAUSE WE ARE NOT OAKLAND
COUNTY AND BECAUSE USUALLY THE
REQUESTS THAT WE MAKE ARE KIND
OF ONE OFFS FROM WHAT THE REST
OF EVERYONE WANTS TO DO, THEY
DON&apos;T TYPICALLY WANT TO DO
THESE THINGS SO WELL.
ABSOLUTELY.
THE DATA THAT WE HAVE THAT
WOULD BE IN FAVOR OF SHARING I
THINK THERE MIGHT BE SOME
CONCERNS OR CONCERNS MIGHT BE
SOME CHALLENGES IN GETTING
THOSE ADDITIONAL ITEMS IN
THERE.
SO WHAT IF EVEN IF WE WE DENHA
COMMISSION PASSES THIS
RESOLUTION THAT WE WANT TO HAVE
THESE THINGS?
I&apos;M NOT SURE THAT WE&apos;RE GOING
TO GET EVERYTHING THAT WE&apos;RE
ASKING FOR THAT MAKES SENSE.
IT DOES.
THANK YOU AND IT&apos;S HELPFUL TO
HAVE THAT THAT CONTEXT BECAUSE
I KNOW THERE ARE A LOT
OF CHALLENGES AROUND GATHERING
THIS DATA AND MAKING IT
AVAILABLE SO IT&apos;S HELPFUL TO
KNOW A BIT MORE SPECIFICALLY
WHAT THOSE ARE ONE ONE DETAIL
THAT I WANTED TO SHARE ABOUT
THESE RESOLUTIONS IS THAT THE
THE RESOLVED LANGUAGE IS THE
SAME IN XBOX VERSION AND HD
VERSION AND OUR VERSION AND
THAT WAS INTENTIONAL SO THAT
WE&apos;RE ALL ASKING FOR THE SAME
THINGS.
SO I THINK EVEN THOUGH IT
SOUNDS LIKE THERE MIGHT IT
MIGHT BE POSSIBLE TO GET ALL
OF THE THINGS THAT ARE
REQUESTED IN THE DRAFT
RESOLUTION, I WOULD ASK US TO
PASS IT AS WRITTEN.
IT DOESN&apos;T HURT TO ASK
BASICALLY AND THEN JUST A
LITTLE MORE DETAIL ABOUT THE
THESE RESOLUTIONS.
THE WHEREASES HAVE BEEN LIKE
WE&apos;VE TAILORED THE WHEREASES TO
EACH COMMISSION SO WE TALK
ABOUT TRANSPORTATION RELATED
WHEREASES IN THIS VERSION THERE
ARE MORE HUMAN RIGHTS RELATED
ONES WITH HRC AND SO ON.
SO BUT THE IDEA IS TO KEEP THE
RESOLVE CLAUSES THE SAME SO
THAT IT&apos;S SORT OF A UNITED
MESSAGE TO COUNCIL FROM ALL
THREE COMMISSIONS AND THERE&apos;S
NOT CONFUSION ABOUT WHAT PEOPLE
ARE ASKING FOR.
ARE THERE ANY QUESTIONS FOR ME
OR FOR LIEUTENANT SCHERBA ABOUT
ANY OF THIS
?
&gt;&gt; I COMMISSIONER BOLEN&apos;S THIS
IS I GUESS A QUESTION FOR
LIEUTENANT SCHERBA HOW LOCKED
IN ARE WE TO THAT OAKLAND
COUNTY DATABASE?
WOULD IT BE A HUGE ORDEAL TO
DEVELOP OUR OWN DATABASE?
THAT&apos;S A GOOD QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; CLEMETSON IS AN ACRONYM FOR
COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
THAT WOULD PROBABLY BEST EQUATE
TO LIKE MICROSOFT AND THEN
THERE&apos;S DIFFERENT MODULES
WITHIN KLEMENS THAT DO
DIFFERENT THINGS.
THE ONE WE USE IS CALLED LAW
THAT CAPTURES THAT DATA TO
CREATE OUR OWN DATA THAT WOULD
BE NOT MY AREA OF EXPERTIZE AND
WHAT THAT WOULD REALLY ENTAIL.
BUT ARE WE GOING TO ASK WHAT IT
WAS LIKE LIKE THE OLD COMPUTER
SAYS LIKE WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT
YOU GET WHEN IT TURNED OUT TO
BE REALLY WHAT YOU GET IS WHAT
YOU GET.
IT MIGHT BE THAT WHAT WE GET IS
WHAT WE GET WHEN IT&apos;S SAID AND
DONE.
WE MAY NOT BE ABLE TO GET ANY
MORE OUT OF THIS THAN WHAT WE
CURRENTLY HAVE.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE THAT MIGHT
END UP BEING A LARGER
DISCUSSION ABOUT LIKE LIFE DOWN
THE LINE THE SYSTEMS THAT WERE
THE THE ABC IS LICENSING AND
YOU KNOW, THE KINDS
OF PURCHASING WE DO FOR THIS
THAT SOFTWARE WHICH IS BEYOND
TONIGHT.
&gt;&gt; BUT I THINK DEFINITELY WORTH
ASKING IN AND QUESTIONABLE AND
I DON&apos;T I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THERE
IS A VENDOR OUT THERE THAT THAT
HAD SUCH A THING THAT COULD BE
CUSTOMIZED FOR THAT CAPTURE
EVERYTHING THAT IT&apos;S BEING
ASKED FOR OR THAT&apos;S SOMETHING
WE HAVE TO CREATE IN-HOUSE OR
WHATEVER IT LOOK LIKE.
YEAH.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS
.
ALL RIGHT.
THEN I AM GOING TO ASK FOR A
MOTION TO APPROVE THE TRAFFIC
STOP TRANSPARENCY RESOLUTION
AND FOR DOWN TO CITY COUNCIL
FOR CONSIDERATION.
COMMISSIONER, HOW TO MACKEY AND
I&apos;LL TAKE A SECOND FROM
COMMISSIONER BRABIN.
&gt;&gt; ALL THOSE IN FAVOR BASICALLY
RAISE YOUR HANDS, ALL THOSE
OPPOSED AND ANY ABSTENTIONS.
ALL RIGHT.
MOTION PASSES THANKS EVERYONE.
NEXT UP WE ARE GOING TO TALK
ABOUT THE VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE SO
INCLUDED IN OUR PACKAGE TONIGHT
IS A PROPOSAL FROM STAFF TO
FORM A VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE UNDER
THE AUSPICES OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
THIS IS SOMETHING WE&apos;VE TALKED
ABOUT AND WE WEREN&apos;T SURE WHAT
FORM EXACTLY WE WOULD TAKE IN
THE PAST.
SO I THINK RAYMOND IS NOW GOING
TO GIVE US A SENSE OF WHAT THE
SHAPE WILL BE.
YES INDEED.
THANK YOU CHAIR KLEIMAN&apos;S SO AS
WE&apos;VE MENTIONED BEFORE AND AS I
THINK ALL OF YOU ARE AWARE, WE
ARE CURRENTLY IN THE MIDST
OF DEVELOPING A VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN PART
OF THAT IS A SORT OF STEERING
COMMITTEE TO HELP THAT PROCESS
ALONG AND WE CALL IT THE VISION
ZERO IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE.
THE FIRST MEETING WAS FEBRUARY
TWENTY THIRD.
SO JUST A FEW WEEKS AGO WE HAD
COMMISSIONER BOLAND AND
COMMISSIONER TOMOKI THERE
REPRESENTING THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
&gt;&gt; WE THANK THEM FOR
PARTICIPATING IN THAT AND ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE TALKED
ABOUT WITH THE COMMITTEE ITSELF
WAS WHETHER OR NOT OR WHAT
STAFF SUGGESTED IS THAT THIS BE
HOUSED UNDER THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
PART OF THE REASON WE THINK
THAT&apos;S IMPORTANT IS IT
ESTABLISHES CLEAR LINES
OF COMMUNICATION THAT IT IS A
COMMITTEE OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AND IT&apos;S SEAMLESS
BECAUSE WHAT WE DON&apos;T REALLY
WANT IS TO HAVE KIND
OF COMPETING RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM DIFFERENT GROUPS AND
REALLY HAVE A KIND OF CLEAR
DIRECTION THAT CHANNELS THROUGH
THE RIGHT THING.
AND THEN QUITE FRANKLY THE
OTHER ASPECT BEHIND THIS TOO IS
THERE&apos;S LONG BEEN DISCUSSION
OF CREATING A VISION ZERO
COMMITTEE IN GENERAL JUST THIS
IS PART OF THE PEDESTRIAN
SAFETY TASK FORCE FROM SEVERAL
YEARS AGO.
AND SO WHAT WE&apos;VE DONE IS THERE
WERE SEVERAL OTHER AD HOC
COMMITTEES.
THERE WAS AN OLD COMMITTEE AND
SOME OTHERS.
AND SO WHAT WE&apos;VE DONE IS WE&apos;VE
KIND OF MUSH THEM ALL TOGETHER
INTO THIS VISION, THEIR
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE AND
AND WE THINK IT&apos;S A GOOD
STRATEGY THAT ADDRESSES THE
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY TASK FORCE AS
WELL AS REPORTING UP TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
THROUGH THOSE LINES
OF COMMUNICATION.
&gt;&gt; SO INCLUDED IN THE PACKET IS
A CHARTER.
IT&apos;S BASED OFF OF SLIDES THAT
WERE SHARED WITH THE COMMITTEE
FEBRUARY TWENTY THIRD MEETING.
SO THE LANGUAGE IS FAIRLY
CONSISTENT AND IT&apos;S MODELED IN
STRUCTURE TO I THINK SOMETHING
THAT COMMISSIONER DIANE SO PUT
TOGETHER LINDA DIANE FOR I
THINK IT WAS THE MICRO MOBILITY
SUBCOMMITTEE OR COMMITTEE SO
THAT&apos;S HOW WE PUT IT TOGETHER.
AND SO AGAIN WE&apos;RE JUST HOPEFUL
THAT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AGREES WITH HAVING
THIS AS A FORMAL COMMITTEE.
THE ONE THING THAT I WILL NOTE
HERE AND THIS IS PROBABLY A TO
BE DETERMINED IS WHAT THE
LIFESPAN OF THAT COMMITTEE WILL
BE RIGHT NOW IT&apos;S REALLY
FOCUSED ON HELPING INFORM THE
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN PROCESS
WHICH INCLUDES THE
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN, A MAJOR
STREETS TRAFFIC CALMING AND
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY OUTREACH.
WHEN THAT CONSULTING CONTRACT
IS DONE, THERE&apos;S PROBABLY A
CONVERSATION THAT NEEDS TO BE
HAD WITH THE COMMITTEE ITSELF
ABOUT WHETHER THAT COMMITTEE
CONTINUES TO LIVE ON IN SOME
PERPETUITY TO HELP CONTINUE
GUIDE VISION ZERO SO WE CAN
PROBABLY HAVE THAT LATTER
DISCUSSION AT A LATER DATE.
BUT I THINK FOR NOW HAVING THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IF IF
YOU ALL ARE INTERESTED IN KIND
OF FORMALLY PUTTING THIS UNDER
NESTING IT WITHIN THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION, WHAT
WE&apos;RE LOOKING FOR TONIGHT THANK
YOU.
&gt;&gt; QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS
AND
WE&apos;LL JUST NOTE BECAUSE WE&apos;VE
GOT SOME NEWER FOLKS ON THE
COMMISSION THAT THE CREATION
OF A VISION ZERO COMMITTEE IS
ACTUALLY RECOMMENDED IN THE
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
SO THIS IS SORT OF LIKE IT WAS
BEFORE THEY RECOMMENDED THAT WE
DO THAT WE CREATE A COMMITTEE
SORT OF IN ADDITION TO THE
EXISTING COMMISSION.
SO I&apos;M I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT EVERY
OTHER MONTH UNTIL LATE SUMMER,
EARLY FALL BECAUSE AT THIS
POINT WE&apos;RE TALKING THAT&apos;S LIKE
TWO OR THREE MEETINGS.
&gt;&gt; IS THAT ENOUGH?
YEAH, NO, THE THE THE WORK
OF THE COMMITTEE WILL CONTINUE
PROBABLY UNTIL EARLY NEXT
CALENDAR YEAR TO BE HONEST WITH
YOU.
I THINK THE THE INITIAL
DELIVERABLES FOR QUICK BUILD
STRATEGIES THOSE ARE THE THINGS
WE&apos;RE WORKING ON IMMEDIATELY
THAT WILL KIND OF HOPEFULLY YOU
KNOW, BE IN THE GROUND BY THE
SUMMER BUT THEN WE WILL MOVE ON
INTO THE MAJOR STREETS, TRAFFIC
CALMING AND SOME OF THOSE OTHER
ASPECTS OF THE SCOPE.
SO SO THERE&apos;S A LOT OF WORK TO
BE DONE.
WHAT WE TRY TO DO IS STRIKE
THAT BALANCE ESPECIALLY FOR,
YOU KNOW, GOOD VOLUNTEERS SUCH
AS YOURSELF NOT TO OVERWHELM
YOU AND ENGAGE YOU IN AN
APPROPRIATE WAY SO THAT IT&apos;S
NOT TOO MUCH WORK ON YOUR END.
BUT WE&apos;RE ENGAGING YOU JUST
ENOUGH TO HELP GUIDE THE
PROCESS SO SO THAT&apos;S THE INTENT
GIVEN THAT I WONDER IF IT MIGHT
GO AHEAD.
I WAS JUST GOING TO SAY
THE
MEETING IS SCHEDULED FOR
FEBRUARY, APRIL AND IN JUNE,
JULY, AUGUST.
SO IN THE SUMMER THEY ARE
MEETING EVERY MONTH BUT THE
FIRST COUPLE OF MEETINGS ARE
SET OFF BY TWO MONTHS.
&gt;&gt; OK, I WONDER IF WE MIGHT
JUST WANT TO MAKE THE LANGUAGE
IN TERMS OF DURATION MORE
FLEXIBLE BOTH IN TERMS
OF FREQUENCY OF MEETINGS AND
HOW LONG THIS IS GOING TO GO
TELL IT SOUNDS LIKE IF WE
ALREADY KNOW THAT IT&apos;S GOING TO
PROBABLY GO INTO EARLY NEXT
YEAR WE SHOULD AT LEAST SAY
THAT IN THIS VERSION OF THE
OF THE COMMITTEE CHARGE WE
WOULD I REMEMBER MY FIRST
EXPERIENCE SOMETHING LIKE THIS
WAS THE MICRO MOBILITY
COMMITTEE WHICH DID NOT HAVE AN
END DATE.
IT JUST SORT OF HAD AN END
PRODUCT AND IT ENDED UP AND IT
WASN&apos;T UNTIL THREE YEARS LATER
WITH THIS WHAT I THINK IT WILL
BE FASTER THAN THAT.
BUT I&apos;M OK WITH SORT OF HAVING
THE CONCLUSION BE THE PRODUCT
RATHER THAN SETTING A DATE.
I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW COMMISSIONERS
BULLYING AND HOW TO MAKE YOU
FEEL YOU ARE THE ONES WHO ARE
ACTUALLY ON THIS COMMITTEE.
&gt;&gt; WHETHER THAT SOUNDS OK TO
YOU, I AGREE WITH WHAT YOU JUST
GOT OUT OF .
YEAH, I DON&apos;T THINK SETTING A
DATE IS I THINK I THINK IT&apos;S
BETTER TO HAVE THE GOAL OF WHAT
THE PRODUCT IS RATHER I THOUGHT
THAT WAS GOING TO BE THE CASE.
&gt;&gt; BUT I MEAN I&apos;M ALWAYS
LOOKING AT THIS WE JUST KIND
OF HAVE TO DELETE THE LATE
SUMMER, EARLY FALL FROM THE
DURATION AND THAT EVERYTHING IN
THERE ALREADY DOES THAT.
SO YEAH, THE COMMISSIONER YEAH.
&gt;&gt; I MEAN THE SUMMER IS THE
DURATION OF THE CONTRACT WITH
THE CONSULTANTS.
WE SHOULD MAYBE UNLINK THAT
FROM THE DURATION OF THE
COMMITTEE.
YEAH I THINK THAT&apos;S RIGHT
BECAUSE WE THERE WAS THE
POSSIBILITY THAT THIS COMMITTEE
WOULD EXIST IN PERPETUITY YOU
KNOW, ONCE WE HAVE A CLEAR
SENSE OF OF HOW THIS
IMPLEMENTATION IS GOING.
BUT I THINK AT MINIMUM LINKING
IT FROM THE CONSULTING CONTRACT
MAKES SENSE.
UH, OTHER COMMENTS QUESTIONS.
ALL RIGHT THEN I AM GOING TO
SUGGEST WE MAKE A MOTION TO LET
ME FIND MY EXACT WORDS THAT I&apos;M
SUPPOSED TO BE SAYING TO
ESTABLISH THE VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE AS A
COMMITTEE OF THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION AND APPROVE A
CHARTER AS AMENDED.
SO JUST REMOVING THE STATE&apos;S SO
DO I HAVE A MOTION TO DO THAT?
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER ROBIN AND I SEE
SECOND FROM HOW TO MACCHI ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR PHYSICALLY RAISE
YOUR HAND ALL THOSE OPPOSED ANY
ABSTENTIONS?
YOU&apos;RE DOING SO MUCH BUSINESS
TONIGHT, EVERYONE ALL RIGHT.
MOTION PASSES I DIDN&apos;T SAY THAT
AND NOW WE&apos;RE GOING TO MOVE ON
TO SOME INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION STARTING WITH STREET
RESURFACING AND RELATED
PROJECTS WITH DAVE DYKEMAN FROM
THE ENGINEERING FIRM FUTURE.
IT&apos;D BE MY DATE.
I&apos;M ONE OF THE PROJECT
ENGINEERING MANAGERS AND
ENGINEERING I&apos;M GOING TO SHARE
MY SCREEN AND HOPEFULLY THIS
WILL COME THROUGH
.
IT LOOKS LIKE I&apos;M DISABLED FROM
PARTICIPANT SCREEN SHARING.
&gt;&gt; I JUST PROMOTED YOU DAVE TO
COHOSTS THAT SHOULD ENABLE YOU
NOW TO PRESENT LET&apos;S TRY THIS
AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; APOLOGIZE FOR THE DELAY.
THERE WE GO.
VERY GOOD.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S UP AND RUNNING.
THANK YOU.
CAN EVERYONE SEE OK THANK YOU
YOUR TO PRESENT DENHA UPCOMING
TWENTY TWENTY TWO STREET
RESURFACING VERMONT&apos;S PLAN FOR
THIS COMING CONSTRUCTION SEASON
AND I THANK YOU FOR THE
OPPORTUNITY TONIGHT FOR SOME
OF YOU THIS PARTS OF THIS
PRESENTATION MAY LOOK FAMILIAR
BUT I HAVE BEEN RUNNING WITH
FOR THE PAST COUPLE OF YEARS SO
FOR OTHERS WHO ARE NEW TO THE
COMMISSION, I HOPE YOU DO LEARN
SOME INFORMATION FROM IT.
WHY IS NOT MY SCREEN THERE WE
GO.
A LITTLE BIT OF BACKGROUND
RESEARCH.
THE OBJECTIVES ARE TWOFOLD
ESSENTIALLY TO RETURN THE
PAYMENT TO A GOOD OR VERY GOOD
CONDITION AND PROVIDE A SMOOTH
SURFACE FOR USERS AND ALSO THE
HANDS TO ENHANCE THE
FUNCTIONALITY AND SAFETY FOR
THE MOTORIZATION ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION USERS DEPICTED
HERE IS AN EXAMPLE OF SOME WORK
WE DID THREE YEARS AGO ON ST.
SCHOOL ROAD BETWEEN OUR PARKWAY
NINE NINETY FOUR WHERE WE
ACTUALLY TOOK THIS SERVICE DOWN
TO ALMOST GRAVEL AND THEN WE
REPLACE THAT EXISTING PAVEMENT
AND WE ADDED WHAT WE CALL
SLOPED KERBEL ON THE SHOULDERS
TO ENHANCE THE STRUCTURAL
STABILITY OF THAT SHOULDERS AND
WE HAD BIKE LANES ALONG THAT
CORRIDOR
.
OUR CORE ELEMENTS
OF RESURFACING OUR WE
IDENTIFIED THE WORK USING THE
PAVEMENT ACID MANAGEMENT DATA
THAT WE COLLECT SEMIANNUAL
BASIS.
WE JUST FINISHED COLLECTION
THAT THAT DATA THIS PAST FALL.
SO WE RATE ALL THE STREETS
THROUGHOUT THE CITY EVERY OTHER
YEAR.
THAT&apos;S A PASSER RATING.
WE CALL IT THE TEN POINT SCALE
WITH ONE BEING THE WORST
CONDITIONS AND TEN BEING
STREETS AND EXCELLENT OR BEST
CONDITION STREETS A PROGRAMER
THE WORK PROGRAM IN THE CITY&apos;S
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
SOME OF THE WORK MAY BE EITHER
STRUCTURAL WHICH WE CONSIDER TO
RESTORATIVE OR REHABILITATIVE
WORK AND OTHER MAY BE
NONSTRUCTURAL WHICH
PRESERVATION TYPE WORK WE&apos;RE
LOOKING TO EXTEND DOWN PAYMENTS
THAT ARE ALREADY IN VERY GOOD
CONDITION.
THE MAJORITY WORK IS CONTAINED
WITHIN THE EXISTING FOOTPRINT
OF THE ROAD THAT INVOLVES
MINIMAL DATA COLLECTION, VERY
LITTLE DESIGN AS WELL AND
TYPICALLY THERE&apos;S NO RIGHT WAY
ACQUISITION OR EASEMENTS
REQUIRED FOR THIS WORK
TREATMENTS AS I MENTIONED
OF PRESERVATION OR
NONSTRUCTURAL.
SO THESE THESE ARE ROADS THAT
ARE CONSIDERED AND AGAIN GOOD
TO FAIR CONDITION RESTORED
WHICH ARE ROADS THAT ARE UNFAIR
TO IN POOR CONDITION AND THEN
REHABILITATION ROADS WHICH IS
ALSO STRUCTURAL.
THOSE ROADS THAT ARE CONSIDERED
TO FAIL OR VERY POOR CONDITION.
SO THOSE ARE ROADS, STREETS ARE
TYPICALLY RATED ONE AND TWO ON
THE FACE OF RATING SCALE
PRESERVATION TREATMENTS ARE
TYPICALLY RATED ANYWHERE
BETWEEN FIVE AND SIX.
&gt;&gt; RESTORATION TREATMENTS ARE
OUR GENERALLY FOUR OR FIVE
THREE, FOUR AND FIVE.
THERE&apos;S ALSO SOME PRESERVATION
WORK THAT WE DO INCLUDING
CRACKS FILLING THE STREETS THAT
ARE RATED SEVEN SO AS PART
OF THE RESURFACING WORK WE LOOK
FOR OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE
IDENTIFIED IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
WE LOOK FOR DRAINAGE FROM WATER
MANAGEMENT OPPORTUNITIES AND WE
ALSO LOOK FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO
MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO FACILITIES
ALONG THESE CORRIDORS TO BRING
THEM IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
DEPICTED HERE AS AN EXAMPLE
OF SOME SIDEWALK RESTORATION OR
ACTUALLY NEW SIDEWALK WORK.
WE ACTUALLY CONSTRUCTED A BUMP
OUT AT THIS LOCATION ON GRANGER
AVENUE IN TWENTY TWENTY SO THIS
WAS CONSIDERED BOTH A SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT STORE IN THE
CROSSWALKS BUT IT ALSO ADDED
ACROSS MIDDLEBY CROSSING TO
THAT STREET AT THIS LOCATION
TYPICAL PROJECTS THAT THE CITY
USES TO TO ADDRESS RESURFACING
ARE WE TYPICALLY CAN&apos;T CONTRACT
OUT AN ANNUAL STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT CURRENTLY
THAT IS OUT FOR BID WITH BIDS
DUE BACK HERE AT THE END OF THE
MONTH.
WE ALSO DO AN ANNUAL STREET
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE
PROJECT THAT RUNS ON A FISCAL
YEAR BASIS.
SO WE CURRENTLY HAVE THE TWENTY
TWENTY TWO POINT I&apos;M SORRY THE
TWENTY TWENTY TWO FISCAL YEAR
PROJECT THAT&apos;S UNDER WAY AND
THAT WILL CONTINUE AND PICK UP
HERE PROBABLY SOMETIME LATE
APRIL IF WE CONTINUE THROUGH
THE END OF JUNE AND THEN WE&apos;LL
BE CONTRACTING OUT OR BIDDING
OUT A NEW PROJECT THAT SHOULD
START SOMETIME AFTER JULY 1ST
OF THIS YEAR AND THAT&apos;LL EXTEND
ALL THE WAY THROUGH JUNE 30TH
OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE.
&gt;&gt; THEN WE ALSO HAVE OTHER
STANDALONE UTILITY AND
RESURFACING PROJECTS THAT ARE
ADDED SEPARATELY THIS YEAR.
&gt;&gt; TWENTY TWENTY TWO STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT FOCUSES ON
WHAT WHAT WE CALL AREA SEVEN
OF THE CITY SO WE DIVIDED THE
CITY INTO ESSENTIALLY A EIGHT
AREAS WITH E FOR ROAD MILEAGE
OF LOCAL STREETS AND EACH
OF THOSE AREAS LAST YEAR OUR
FOCUS AREA WAS DOWN HERE IN THE
SOUTHEAST PART OF THE CITY AND
AREA FOR THIS YEAR WE&apos;RE GOING
TO BE HERE MORE ON THE WEST
SIDE OF THE CITY AREA.
SO THIS DEPICTS THE THE
MAJORITY OF THE WORK THAT&apos;S
PLANNED FOR THE RESURFACING
PROJECT THIS YEAR STREETS THAT
ARE THAT ARE HIGHLIGHTED RED ON
THE MAP HERE INCLUDES ABOUT
TWENTY STREETS OF TWENTY LOCAL
STREETS WHERE
DOING
REHABILITATION TYPE WORK.
SO WE&apos;LL BE TAKING THE PAVEMENT
COMPLETELY THE ASPHALT PAVEMENT
COMPLETELY OFF THOSE STREETS
DOWN THE BASE MAKING
IMPROVEMENTS ARE NECESSARY
CORRECTIONS TO THE AGGREGATE OR
GRAVEL BASE BENEATH THAT
PAVEMENT THEN REPAVING THOSE
STREETS.
WE ALSO HAVE SOME PRESERVATION
WORK PLAN FOR THIS PROJECT ON
11TH STREET.
SO THAT&apos;LL BE MORE WHAT WE CALL
A THIN MELON INFILL.
SO WE&apos;LL JUST BE REMOVING THE
UPPER PORTION OF THE ASPHALT
PAVEMENT AND REPLACING IT.
WE ALSO HAVE THREE ASPHALT
PATHS WITHIN THE CITY THAT ARE
ESSENTIALLY OUTSIDE OF THIS
AREA, ONE LOCATED LIBERTY.
WE HAVE ANOTHER ALONG
EISENHOWER PARKWAY AND ANOTHER
DOWN ALONG STATE STREET SOUTH
OF EISENHOWER PARKWAY AND THOSE
WILL BE REHABILITATION TYPE
PROJECTS OR REMOVE OR PULVERIZE
THAT EXISTING PAVEMENT AND THEN
PLACE A NEW ASPHALT OVER TOP
OF THAT PULVERIZED MATERIAL
THAT WILL BE CONVERTING TO
ASPHALT PATHS TO CONCRETE
SIDEWALK.
&gt;&gt; WHAT I DIDN&apos;T MENTION HERE
THAT WE DO HAVE TO DO AS PART
RESURFACING WORK IS WE WORK IN
CONJUNCTION WITH THE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM AND SO AS PART
OF WE&apos;LL DO THE INSTALLATION
WORK OF TRAFFIC CALMING DEVICES
THAT HAVE BEEN APPROVED.
SO THIS YEAR THERE&apos;S TWO
PROJECTS THAT HAVE BEEN
APPROVED ON LONG ISLAND AND
FAIRVIEW THAT&apos;S ONE PROJECT AND
THEN ANOTHER OH IT ESCAPES ME
MAYBE RAYMOND YOU COULD HELP ME
NYR
I MENTIONED THERE&apos;S ALSO
THE TWO STREET PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE PROJECTS THAT WILL
BE OCCURRING THIS CONSTRUCTION
SEASON THE ONE IN TWENTY TWENTY
TWO IS ALREADY UNDERWAY AND
THEY&apos;LL PICK UP LIKE I
MENTIONED IN APRIL THOSE
PROJECTS INVOLVE CRACKED
CEILING PATCHING OF THE STREETS
WHICH BOTH OF THOSE ACTIVITIES
ARE IN PREPARATION FOR PLACING
WHAT WE CALL A CAPSULE SURFACE
TREATMENT THAT KEEPS THE OLD
TREATMENT INVOLVES PLACING A
CHIP SEAL DEPICTED DOWN HERE IN
THE THE LOWER RIGHT OF THE
SCREEN FOLLOWED BY THE SECOND
COURSE TREATMENT PLACED OVER
TOP OF THAT CAPSULE CALLED
MICRO SURFACING.
THE CITY&apos;S BEEN DOING THAT
PROBABLY NOW FOR ACTIVELY FOR
ABOUT THE LAST FOUR YEARS.
&gt;&gt; SO WE HAVE AN ACTIVE PROGRAM
PROBABLY BACK TWO DECADES AGO
AND BUDGET BUDGET CUTS GOING TO
END OF THAT PROGRAM.
BUT WE&apos;VE PICKED IT UP AS PART
OF OUR PAYMENT MANAGEMENT TOOL,
ONE OF OUR TOOLS IN OUR
TOOLKIT.
&gt;&gt; SO WE&apos;VE GOT THE
PRESERVATION PLAN FOR 20 MAJOR
STREETS AND 60 LOCAL STREETS
AND WE&apos;RE ACTUALLY PRESENTLY
DETERMINING THE CRACKED CEILING
LOCATIONS WITH THOSE FOR BOTH
MAJOR AND LOCAL STREETS ALL
THROUGHOUT THE CITY AS WELL.
INFORMATION CAN BE FOUND AT ALL
THE CONSTRUCTION ROAD
CONSTRUCTION PLAN AT THIS LINK
HERE IT&apos;S ACTUALLY HAS A
INTERACTIVE MAP THAT YOU CAN
CLICK ON AND ZOOM IN AND LOOK
AT ALL THE VARIOUS PLANNED
PROJECTS FOR THIS COMING
CONSTRUCTION SEASON, ALL THE
VARIOUS LOCATIONS IN TERMS
OF THE MAJOR STREET PROJECT
LOCATIONS THAT ARE PLANNED FOR
THIS YEAR.
THOSE INCLUDE BROADWAY STREET,
AREHART ROAD, GETTI AVENUE,
HRREM PARKWAY AND TUEBINGEN
PARKWAY FLAT ROAD OUTRIDGE ROAD
SOUTH STATE STREET.
&gt;&gt; I DO PROJECTS HERE THAT I&apos;M
CURRENTLY MANAGING AND I&apos;M TO
SPEAK TO YOU A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT WHAT&apos;S PLANNED FOR THOSE
TWO LOCATIONS.
THERE&apos;S INTEREST IN ANY
OF THESE OTHER PROJECTS
CERTAINLY INFORM COMMISSIONER
HAAS AND COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON PERHAPS THERE COULD
BE A PRESENTATION DONE ON ANY
OF THESE INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS IF
THERE IS THAT INTEREST IN TERMS
OF GETTING THAT THIS PROJECT
EXTENDS FROM OBSERVATORY STREET
UP HERE AT THE TOP OF THE
SCREEN DOWN TO HIGHLAND IT
INVOLVES PAVEMENT
REHABILITATION SO BE COMPLETELY
REMOVING THE EXISTING ASPHALT
PAVEMENT SURFACE AND REPLACING
THAT TO PROVIDE A SMOOTH
SURFACE AND A LONGER LASTING
LIFE OF THAT ROADWAY.
THEY&apos;LL BE SEGMENTS OF CONCRETE
CURB AND GUTTER ALONG THE
ROADWAY THAT WILL BE REMOVED
AND REPLACED AS WELL AS THE
VAST MAJORITY OF ANY DRAIN
DRAINAGE STRUCTURE OR FOR IN
INLETS ALONG THAT CORRIDOR.
THERE&apos;S ALSO SOME STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PROPOSED AS A PART
OF THIS APPEAR BETWEEN ITS
WALNUT AND LINDEN STREETS.
WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE INSTALLING
SOME OVERSIZE PIPE EVEN WE&apos;RE
STRUCTURES TO SLOW THE RELEASE
OF STORMWATER INTO THE BASIN
SYSTEM DOES IS A PART OF THAT
ADDITION OR SOME EXCUSE ME SOME
ACCESSIBILITY UPGRADES.
SO THERE ARE SOME STEPS OR
CONCRETE STAIRS WITHIN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT AWAY.
ONE SET OF THOSE IS DOWN HERE
THE IF AT THE END NEAR ONONDAGA
AND THERE&apos;S ANOTHER AT OXFORD
WHICH IS DOWN IN THIS LOCALE,
THE ONES THAT WILL BE REMOVED
AND REPLACED WITH NEW ADA
COMPLIANT RAMPS AND SIDEWALK
THE ONES AT DIGABLE WILL BE
RECONSTRUCTED TO BE MADE ADA
COMPLIANT BUT THEN WE WILL ALSO
BE INSTALLING RAMPS, SIDEWALKS,
SYSTEM FOR ACCESSIBILITY THERE
AS WELL FOR DISABLED
PEDESTRIANS TO USE.
&gt;&gt; IN ADDITION WE&apos;LL BE
UPDATING STREET LIGHTING ALONG
THE CORRIDOR AT THE EXISTING
MID BLOCK AND THE BLACK AND
INTERSECTION CROSSWALKS THOSE
ARE LOCATED HERE AT THE I THINK
THIS IS WALNUT LINDEN.
THERE&apos;S A MID BLACK CROSSING UP
HERE BETWEEN RIDGEWAY AND THE
ENTRANCE TO THE ARBORETUM.
SO THOSE WILL INVOLVE ADA
UPGRADES THAT THOSE THOSE
LOCATIONS AS WELL AS ADDITIONAL
STREET LIGHT STREET LIGHTING
ENHANCEMENTS AND THEN WE&apos;LL BE
INSTALLING A NEW CROSSING AT
HARVARD PLACE TOGETHER WITH
STREET LIGHTING AT THAT LOCAL.
LASTLY, WE WILL BE INSTALLING A
BUMP OUT ON THE EXCUSE ME THIS
IS THE SOUTHEAST QUADRANT
OF THE OBSERVATORY AND GETTING
AN INTERSECTION THAT WILL
FACILITATE A SHORTER CROSSING
ON OBSERVATORY AND ALLOW FOR
SOME RECONFIGURATION OF THAT S
OBSERVATORY TO ADD PARKING
ALONG THE EAST SIDE THAT&apos;LL
INVOLVE THE ELIMINATION OF THE
RIGHT TURN LANE.
IT&apos;S PRESENTLY ON THAT LEG
OF THE ROADWAY THERE.
&gt;&gt; THAT INTERSECTION THE NEXT
LOCALE IS HYRUM PARKWAY AND
TUEBINGEN PARKWAY SCOPE OF THIS
PROJECT IS VERY SIMILAR TO THAT
AND GETTING WILL BE AGAIN
REMOVING THE ENTIRETY OF THE
ASPHALT PAVEMENT GRAVEL BASE
MAKING GRAVEL BASE IMPROVEMENTS
AND REPAVING SURFACE AND
REPLACING IT WITH THE NEW
ASPHALT SURFACE AGAIN THERE
WILL BE SOME ACCESSIBILITY
UPGRADES TO EXISTING CROSSWALK
RAMPS IN ST. LOUIS ALONG THE
CORRIDOR THOSE PRIMARILY WILL
BE AT THE INTERSECTION
OF TREYVAUD AND HERE AND
PARKWAY AND THEN UP HERE AT
LANKERSHIM AND TO BEGIN IN
ADDITION WE WILL BE WE&apos;RE
CONSIDERING A LANE THREE TO TWO
LANE CONVERSION ALONG THIS
CORRIDOR THAT PRESENTLY HAS ONE
IN EACH DIRECTION WITH THE
CENTER LEFT TURN LANE DOWN THE
MIDDLE.
THE CONSIDERATION IS TO
ELIMINATE THE CENTER TURN LANE
AND ADD BIKE LANES IN EACH
DIRECTION ON THIS CORRIDOR AND
THEN WANT TO BEGIN HERE TO THE
VERY WEST END OF THE PROJECT.
WE WILL BE REDUCING THE WIDTH
OF THE ROADWAY WE HAVE
EXTREMELY WIDE ROADWAY BETWEEN
LANCASHIRE AND TRAVER AND
PLANNING TO REDUCE THAT ROADWAY
WITH SO IT STILL WILL
ACCOMMODATE BITLY BIKE LANES
BUT THEN WE&apos;LL BE EXTENDING THE
SIDEWALKS FROM THE SOUTH UP TO
TRAILER SO THERE WILL BE NEW
SIDEWALKS PLACED ON BOTH SIDES
OF THAT SEGMENT WITHIN THE
ROADWAY AS WELL AND THEN NEW
CROSSWALKS ADDED TO THE
TUEBINGEN BEGIN AND TREVER
INTERSECTION AS WELL AS SOME
NEW STREET LIGHTING AND STREET
LIGHTING UPGRADES THAT NOW AND
HERE&apos;S A DEPICTION OF WHAT&apos;S
PROPOSED ON OR AT LEAST UNDER
CONSIDERATION RIGHT NOW WE&apos;RE
WE&apos;LL BE UNDERTAKING A PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS TO SOLICIT
FEEDBACK ABOUT THIS PROPOSED
CHANGE.
BUT THIS SHOWS WHAT&apos;S EXISTING
OUT THERE WITH THE THREE LANE
SECTIONS SENATORIAL LANE DOWN
IN THE CENTER OF THE ROADWAY
AND A CONVERSION FROM FROM THAT
TO THE TWO LANE ROADWAY WITH
BIKE LANES ALONG EACH SIDE.
THESE AND THESE LANES WOULD BE
TEN LANES SIMILAR THAT WE HAVE
THE SAME CONFIGURATION PROPOSED
BY I HAVE AS WELL GATTI&apos;S I
HAVE CURRENTLY AS FOLLOWS THE
MARYLAND AND THAT I&apos;M OPEN FOR
ANY QUESTIONS PEOPLE MAY HAVE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
IF YOU COULD END THIS SCREEN
SHARE IT&apos;S EASIER FOR ME TO SEE
FOLKS RAISING THEIR HANDS.
&gt;&gt; IN FACT
THANKS IF YOU COULD
JUST USE THE RAISED HAND
FUNCTION.
ANYONE WHO HAS QUESTIONS EASIER
WHEN WE&apos;VE GOT A STACK
I HAVE
QUESTIONS
BUT I USUALLY LET
EVERYONE ELSE GO FIRST.
NO OTHER QUESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
I&apos;M GOING TO GUESS HOW MANY
EGGS FIRST TO COMMENT THAT I
REALLY LIKE THE PROPOSED
RECONFIGURATION OF YOUR PARKWAY
TO ADD BIKE LANES AND REDUCE
THE LANE WITH I THINK THAT
WOULD BE GREAT.
DO YOU HAVE FOR THE AREAS ONE
THROUGH EIGHT DO YOU HAVE A
NEAR TERM IDEA OF WHAT AREA
WILL BE NEXT YEAR IN THE YEAR
AFTER MAYBE?
IS IT REALLY JUST A ROUND ROBIN
OR JUST IN TERMS OF ANSWERING
QUESTIONS THAT I GET FROM
PEOPLE WHEN IS OUR AREA GOING
TO BE UP WITH EIGHT AREAS?
IT COULD BE I DON&apos;T KNOW IF
IT&apos;S NEXT YEAR OR EIGHT YEARS
FROM NOW AND KIND OF NOT AT ALL
SURE.
SO PRESENTLY OUR PLAN IS TO
WORK IN AREA THREE NEXT YEAR
AND THEN WE WOULD GO BACK TO
AREA SEVEN AGAIN IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR AND THEN AREA FOUR
IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND THE
ONE THAT WE&apos;RE IN THE PROCESS
OF ACTUALLY UPDATING THAT PLAN
TO LOOK AT THE YEAR FURTHER OUT
BEYOND THAT
OK TO START MY
QUESTIONS SO I NOTICED THAT YOU
MENTIONED A COUPLE THERE ARE A
COUPLE OF PLACES WHERE YOU&apos;RE
MAKING A CONVERSION FROM
ASPHALT TO CONCRETE THE
SIDEWALKS.
I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT THE RATIONALE
FOR THAT AND WHAT THE USAGE
OF THOSE ARE BECAUSE I KNOW
WHEN THEY&apos;RE TREATED AS
MULTIUSE PATHS, I THINK ASPHALT
IS GENERALLY MORE PLEASANT ON A
BIKE THAN THAN CONCRETE
SIDEWALKS.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT HOW THE
DECISION WAS MADE.
SO THOSE WERE LOCATIONS WHERE
THE THE EXISTING ASPHALT PATHS
WERE VERY NARROW.
THEY&apos;RE ACTUALLY ACTING AS
ESSENTIALLY ASPHALT SIDEWALK.
&gt;&gt; THE MAJORITY WORK WELL THOSE
ARE LOCATED THERE&apos;S ALREADY A
CONCRETE SIDEWALK PRESENTED AT
EITHER SIDE OF THOSE.
SO IT WOULD STAFF LOOKED AT IT
THAT COULD MAKE BETTER SENSE TO
INCORPORATE THOSE AND MAKE THEM
SIDEWALKS VERSUS ASPHALT AS ONE
OF THOSE LOCATIONS IS AT THE
VERY EAST END OF OAK BROOK
DRIVE THERE JUST EAST TO MAIN
STREET.
WE IMPROVE THE PATH TO THE LEFT
TO THE WEST TO MAIN STREET BACK
IN TWENTY TWENTY.
BUT WE DIDN&apos;T HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY BECAUSE OF FUNDING
TO DO THIS STRETCH.
SO THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S ONE OF THE
LOCATIONS.
&gt;&gt; SO WE HAVE A SIMILAR
SITUATION ON EISENHOWER PARKWAY
WHERE IT&apos;S VERY ESSENTIALLY
ACTING AS AN ASPHALT SIDEWALK
AGAIN, IT&apos;S THERE&apos;S A SHORT
PIECE BETWEEN TWO PIECES
OF EXISTING CONCRETE SIDEWALK
SO WE FELT IT JUST MAKES BETTER
SENSE TO CONVERT TO A CONCRETE
SIDEWALK WHICH IS KEEPING
ASPHALT THERE.
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE LIKE PRICE OR
CONVENIENCE DIFFERENTIALS IN
TERMS OF ONE OVER THE OTHER?
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING WE&apos;LL LOOK AT
BECAUSE WE DO TAKE BIDS FOR
BOTH SO WE HAVE ASPHALT HAS PAY
ITEMS IN OUR CONTRACT AS WELL
AS SIDEWALK PRICING AS WELL AND
WE THAT THERE MAY BE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO ACTUALLY PULL
THIS OUT OF THE RESURFACING
PROJECT AND DO AS PART OF THE
SIDEWALK PROGRAM BECAUSE THAT
PRICING MAY COME IN MORE
FAVORABLE BIDS THAT WE RECEIVE
FOR THE RESURFACING PROJECT.
SO OK, YEAH.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON, I
JUST WANTED TO ADD THAT TO THE
OTHER ADVANTAGE OF REPLACING
THOSE ASPHALT SIDEWALKS WITH
CONCRETE IS THE CONCRETE IS
MUCH EASIER TO MAINTAIN IN THE
LONG RUN AND IS AND WILL LAST
LONGER.
WE HAVE A LOT OF ASPHALT HAS IN
VERY POOR CONDITION BECAUSE
THEY&apos;RE VERY DIFFICULT TO
MAINTAIN SO I DON&apos;T SEE THAT&apos;S
THAT&apos;S HELPFUL.
I WAS CURIOUS ABOUT THAT KIND
OF REASONING.
SO ANOTHER THING I&apos;M REALLY
HAPPY TO HEAR THAT AS A PART
OF ONE OF THESE PROJECTS
THERE&apos;S A REDUCTION OF WHAT&apos;S
HAPPENING.
I THINK THERE ARE A LOT
OF PLACES AROUND TOWN WHERE OUR
ROADS ARE PROBABLY WIDER THAN
WE NEED THEM TO BE, ESPECIALLY
WE WANT TO BE REDUCING DRIVER
SPEEDS AND WE ACTUALLY PUBLIC
COMMENT THIS WEEK ABOUT I THINK
IT WAS VIRGINIA WHICH IS ON THE
AGENDA FOR THIS YEAR IN TERMS
OF RESURFACING PROJECT SORT
OF POINTING OUT THAT THERE&apos;S A
SECTION THAT&apos;S QUITE WIDE WHERE
THE POTHOLES ARE BASICALLY
SERVING AS TRAFFIC COMING AND
ASKING ABOUT WHETHER A
NARROWING MIGHT BE A
POSSIBILITY THERE AND KNOWING
THAT IT&apos;S HAPPENING ELSEWHERE,
I&apos;M CURIOUS HOW THAT
CONSIDERATION MIGHT BE MADE FOR
SOME OF THE OTHER STREETS,
ESPECIALLY THE NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS ON THIS LIST.
&gt;&gt; WELL, TYPICALLY LIKE I
MENTIONED THROUGH RESURFACING
WORK WE&apos;RE CONFINED TO WORKING
WITHIN WITHIN THE FOOTPRINT
OF THE ROAD JUST BECAUSE IT&apos;S
IT&apos;S COST PROHIBITIVE TO REMOVE
THE ENTIRETY OF THE CONCRETE TO
NARROW THE STREET.
WE CERTAINLY UNDERSTAND THAT
THERE MAY BE SOME AREAS WHERE
THAT OPPORTUNITY PRESENTS
ITSELF AND IT MAKES SENSE BUT
IT IS A COSTLY ENDEAVOR TO TRY
TO DO THAT CERTAINLY IN OUR
STREET I DID ACTUALLY RECEIVE
AN EMAIL ABOUT THAT SEGMENT
OF VIRGINIA AS WELL AND WE
LOOKED AT THAT AND IT MADE MY
BABY MORE RECEPTIVE BECAUSE THE
WIDTH OF THAT STREET IS ONLY
IT&apos;S ESSENTIALLY A FOOT OR A
FOOT WIDER THAN WHERE WHERE THE
BEYOND WHERE WE&apos;RE PLANNING TO
WORK THIS YEAR.
&gt;&gt; SO OK, THANKS IN ADVANCE
MEET IN THE CAR.
&gt;&gt; IT DOES MEET OUR CURRENT
WITH STANDARDS FOR A LOCAL
STREET.
&gt;&gt; OK, I WONDER WHETHER MAYBE
ON THE LIST SHOULD BE LOOKING
AT THOSE WITH STANDARDS IF
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE
SEEING IN OTHER PLACES BUT
THAT&apos;S OBVIOUSLY NOT FOR THE
RESURFACING PROJECT.
MY LAST QUESTION IS ABOUT SO
I&apos;M ALSO ALL FOR BIKE LANES ON
HERE PARKWAY BUT I&apos;M CURIOUS
ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY
OF VERTICAL ELEMENTS AND MAYBE
THAT&apos;S MORE A QUESTION FOR
RAYMOND BUT YOU KNOW, PAINT
FEELS LIKE THE BARE MINIMUM AND
SO ANY TIME WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
ADDING LANES, I WANT TO THINK
ABOUT WAYS WE CAN BE PROTECTING
THEM.
YEAH, AND DAVIES WORKED PRETTY
CLOSELY WITH ONE OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS ON THE
PROJECT.
SO TYPICALLY WHENEVER A
VERTICAL ELEMENT IS INCLUDED
YOU NEED TO HAVE A SHY
DISTANCE, RIGHT.
SO THAT WHEN PEOPLE ARE BIKING
THEY DON&apos;T FEEL THEY&apos;RE GOING
TO HIT THEIR HANDLEBARS ON IT.
SO YOU KNOW, BASED ON THE
DESCRIPTION I THINK THERE
PROBABLY ISN&apos;T ENOUGH WIDTH TO
PUT IN.
YOU WOULD NEED THE BUFFER AS
WELL AS THE VERTICAL ELEMENTS
IN THE BUFFER TO STILL MAINTAIN
THAT DISTANCE FROM THE VERTICAL
ELEMENT.
SO I THINK IT&apos;S JUST A FUNCTION
OF THAT CENTER TURN.
DAVE, I&apos;M GOING TO SPECULATE
HERE WAS PROBABLY 10 FEET WIDE
AND SO WE JUST KIND OF SPLIT
THE BABY INTO WE CUT IT HALF
PUT THOSE FIVE FEET ON EACH
SIDE AGAINST THE CURB AND THOSE
ARE THE BIKE LANES BUT THERE IS
NOT MUCH MORE ROOM TO SPARE
BEYOND THAT IS A FAIR GUESS,
DAVE.
YES, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S CORRECT.
THEY&apos;RE JUST THEY&apos;RE JUST AS
THE WIDTH ALONG THAT QUARTER TO
FACILITATE PUTTING IN A
PHYSICAL ELEMENT.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANKS.
THAT&apos;S ALL OF MY QUESTIONS AND
ANY OTHER ONES.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
AND IT SOUNDS LIKE WE&apos;RE READY
TO MOVE ON.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR THAT
PRESENTATION.
THAT&apos;S ALWAYS I ALWAYS LIKE
SEEING WHAT WHAT IMPROVEMENTS
WE&apos;RE GOING EACH YEAR.
SO MOVING ON TO THE TRIPLE ACA
LONG RANGE PLAN THAT CARPENTER
AND FORCED YANG FROM THE RIDE
AS WELL AS YOU&apos;VE ALL GREENSPUN
WHO IS A CONSULTANT ARE GOING
TO GIVE US AN UPDATE ON THE THE
TRANSIT LONG RANGE PLAN.
THANK YOU, MADAM CHAIR.
MY NAME IS THE YES I&apos;M THE
DEPUTY CEO OF PLANET INNOVATION
AT THE RIGHT AND WITH ME TODAY
YOU&apos;VE ALL AGREED THAT BENGAZI
TURN RIGHT RETURN THE
CONSULTING FIRM WORKING WITH US
ON THIS PROJECT.
OF COURSE TO TO IT AS YOU
REMEMBER WE WERE HERE LAST
FALL.
YOU DISCUSSED THE FOUR
SCENARIOS.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR FEEDBACK
BACK THEN AND OF COURSE THANKS
TO ALL THE COMMITTEE MEMBERS
WHO PROVIDE FEEDBACK.
SO WE INCORPORATE ALL THE
FEEDBACK AND IN OUR DIRECT
DRAFT RECOMMENDATIONS TO
TONIGHT BASICALLY SAY WE JUST
WANT TO GIVE YOU A QUICK
OVERVIEW OF THIS RECOMMENDATION
AND GET YOUR FEEDBACK.
SO I&apos;M RETURN THAT TO YOU BUT
ALSO AN EXPECTATION.
THANK YOU.
GREAT THANKS.
FOREST.
&gt;&gt; HOW IS MY AUDIO?
GREAT.
GREAT SOUND AND AND MY SLIDES
ARE ON THE SCREEN NOW I JUST ON
I&apos;M JUST GOING TO PAN THE ZOOM
SO THAT ALL RIGHT GOOD SO THAT
I CAN SEE YOU FOLKS IF SOMEONE
RAISES THEIR HAND SO AGAIN
THANKS FOR HAVING ME TODAY MY
NAME IS YOU&apos;VE ALL BEEN ON THE
PRINCIPLE WITH LEFT TURN RIGHT
TURN WHERE THE CONSULTING FIRM
THAT&apos;S BEEN BROUGHT ON BY THE
RIDE TO DEVELOP A LONG RANGE
TRANSIT PLAN FOR THE GREATER
ANN ARBOR EXCELLENT AREA SO
REALLY EXCEPT TO BE HERE TALK
TO YOU FOLKS AGAIN ABOUT THE
RIDE TWENTY FORTY FIVE PROJECT
AND SPECIFICALLY THE DRAFT PLAN
THAT WE&apos;VE DEVELOPED BASED
DEVELOPED BASED ON EXTENSIVE
COMMUNITY INPUT.
SO WE STARTED THE PROJECT OVER
A YEAR AGO AND COME A LONG WAY
TODAY WE&apos;RE GOING TO START BY
REFRESHING YOU BOTH THE
PLANNING PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; THEN WE&apos;LL GO OVER WHAT WE
HEARD FROM THE PUBLIC WHEN WE
SHARED OUR IDEAS WITH WITH ALL
OF YOU IN THE FALL.
&gt;&gt; AND THEN FINALLY WE&apos;LL GET
INTO THE DETAILS OF THE DRAFT
PLAN ITSELF.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHERE WE&apos;LL SPEND THE
MAJORITY OF THE FIFTEEN MINUTES
WE WANT TO HEAR YOUR THOUGHTS
SO ULTIMATELY WILL RELY ON ON
THE FEEDBACK THE PUBLIC
CUSTOMERS, STAFF, ELECTED
OFFICIALS AND ALL ALL THE
STAKEHOLDERS ARE MEETING WITH
TO FINALIZE OUR PLAN FOR THE
PERIOD.
&gt;&gt; SO THE PROJECT ITSELF
CONSIDERS THE TRANSIT NETWORK
INCLUDING OUR BUS ROUTES AND
THEIR FREQUENCY NEW AND BETTER
TYPES OF TRANSIT NEW TYPES
OF SERVICES, INFRASTRUCTURE,
TECHNOLOGY AND VEHICLES
.
AND IT&apos;S WORTH NOTING FOR ALL
OF YOU THAT WE DO HAVE A
PROJECT WEBSITE EMBEDDED AT THE
RUG WHERE YOU CAN LEARN MORE
ABOUT THE WORK THAT WE&apos;VE DONE
TO DATE.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;VE SHARED VARIOUS REPORTS
THROUGH THERE INCLUDING THE
WHAT WE HEARD REPORT MOST
RECENTLY WITH THE RESULTS
OF ALL THAT FEEDBACK FROM FROM
OUR LAST ROUND OF ENGAGEMENT
WHICH INCLUDED OF COURSE THIS
COMMITTEE THIS COMMISSION.
SO THE DRAFT PLAN THAT WE&apos;RE
GOING TO BE SHARING TODAY HAS
BEEN DEVELOPED WITH A FEW
SPECIFIC GOALS IN MIND AND AS
WE TALKED ABOUT LAST TIME, THE
GOAL IS VERY MUCH MIRROR MANY
OF THE MUNICIPAL GOALS THAT
HAVE BEEN SET AND SO OUR
INTENTION IS TO DESIGN A
TRANSIT SYSTEM THAT INCREASES
SOCIAL EQUITY BY IMPROVING THE
ACCESS TO JOBS, EDUCATION AND
HOUSING TO HELP THE ENVIRONMENT
AND REDUCE AIR POLLUTION AND TO
SUPPORT EXISTING AND ATTRACT
NEW BUSINESSES.
&gt;&gt; AND THESE GOALS WERE
ESTABLISHED BASED ON WHAT WE
HEARD FROM THE COMMUNITY
STAKEHOLDERS, OUR BOARD AS WELL
AS CUSTOMERS AND THE GOALS HAVE
BEEN CENTRAL TO GUIDING HOW
DECISIONS HAVE BEEN MADE AND
THE OUTCOMES THAT WE HOPE TO
ACHIEVE THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
RIGHT TWENTY FOUR FORTY FIVE
HAS TAKEN PLACE OVER FOUR
PHASES SO THE FIRST PHASE WAS
GUIDANCE WHERE WE DEVELOPED THE
GOALS AND METHODOLOGY TO GUIDE
DECISIONS ALONG THE WAY.
&gt;&gt; THE NEXT PHASE WAS ANALYSIS
WHERE WE LOOKED AT HOW THE
CURRENTLY OPERATES AND HOW THE
COMMUNITY IN TRANSIT IS
EXPECTED CHANGE IN TERMS
OF DEMOGRAPHICS BUILT FORM
TECHNOLOGY OVER THE NEXT TWENTY
FIVE YEARS IN THE THIRD PHASE
WHICH FORREST ALLUDED TO WE
CREATED POTENTIAL SCENARIOS
BASED ON DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF FUNDING AND WE TOOK FOUR
OF THOSE SCENARIOS TO THE
PUBLIC AND STAKEHOLDERS LAST
FALL FOR INPUT AND NOW WE&apos;RE IN
THE LAST PHASE OF THE PROJECT.
WE&apos;VE NARROWED IN ON A SINGLE
DRAFT PLAN FOR TRANSIT IN THE
AREA BASED ON ALL THAT FEEDBACK
AND ALONGSIDE THAT DEVELOPMENT
ACHIEVABLE ROADMAP THAT LAYS
OUT THE STEPS OVER THE NEXT
TWENTY FIVE YEARS TO BUILD UP
TRENDS THAT FUTURE TRANSIT
SYSTEM AND WORK TOWARDS MEETING
THOSE GOALS AND WE ARE EXCITED
TO SHARE THAT WITH YOU TODAY.
&gt;&gt; COLLECT YOUR FEEDBACK.
SO LET&apos;S TAKE JUST A BRIEF
MOMENT TO SHARE WHAT WE HEARD
FROM PREVIOUS ENGAGEMENTS THAT
GUIDE US NOW I WILL NOTE THAT
THE VERSION THE DEC THAT WAS
SHARED WITH YOU IN ADVANCE HAD
ADDITIONAL SLIDES WHICH YOU&apos;RE
WELCOME TO TO LOOK AT BUT FOR
TODAY JUST IN THE INTEREST
OF KEEPING THINGS SHORT, WE&apos;VE
CONSOLIDATED DOWN TO ONE SLIDE
SO WE CAME TO STAKEHOLDERS IN
THE FALL AND WE&apos;RE EXCITED WITH
THE ENGAGEMENT THAT WE HAD.
&gt;&gt; WE ACTUALLY REACHED ALMOST
FOURTEEN OR FOURTEEN HUNDRED
PEOPLE I SHOULD SAY IN THE
COMMUNITY.
AND SO THAT RESOUNDING
RESOUNDING RESPONSE THAT WE
HEARD AT MEETINGS AND THROUGH
OUR SURVEY THAT WE DID WAS IT
DESIRE NOT JUST FOR SMALL
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE SAME SYSTEM
BUT FOR A DEEPLY
TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE AND YOU
CAN SEE THE STAT THERE
OF SEVENTY TWO PERCENT
OF SURVEY RESPONDENTS TELLING
US THE PREFERRED SCENARIO FOR
IF YOU REMEMBER SINCE SCENARIO
FOUR WAS BY AND LARGE THE MOST
AGGRESSIVE TRANSFORMATION
FOCUSED SCENARIO THAT WE PUT
FORWARD TO TO THE PUBLIC AND TO
STAKEHOLDERS.
&gt;&gt; WE ALSO HEARD A BROAD DESIRE
FOR CONVENIENCE, RELIABILITY
AND DEPENDABILITY AND IN THE
DRAFT PLAN WE BUILT ON THE
IDEAS THAT RESONATED LAST TIME
INCLUDING AN EXTENSIVE HIGH
FREQUENCY NETWORK, BETTER
SERVICE, FASTER TRAVEL TIMES
USING BRT OR BUS RAPID TRANSIT
PRIORITY AND EXPRESS ROUTES.
THESE IMPROVEMENTS DO COST OR
DO HAVE COST AND SUBSTANTIAL
COST.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
HEARD LAST TIME IS THAT MOST
OF THE PEOPLE WERE WILLING TO
PAY FOR THE INVESTMENTS OF THE
BENEFITS.
&gt;&gt; THE COMMUNITY ARE CLEAR AND
SO THROUGH OUR OUR WORK AND
THROUGH OUR UPCOMING ENGAGEMENT
ONE OF OUR OBJECTIVES IS REALLY
TO LAY OUT THE BENEFITS THAT
ARE THAT ARE REACHABLE BY FOR
THE COMMUNITY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO LET&apos;S LET&apos;S TURN OUR
ATTENTION AND LOOK AT THE
DETAILS OF THE PLAN ITSELF.
&gt;&gt; SO WE STARTED WITH THE
FEEDBACK THAT WE RECEIVED LAST
FALL AND BUILT FROM THERE AS I
MENTIONED, THE TRANSFORMING
SCENARIO IS THE CLEAR THE CLEAR
PREFERENCE.
&gt;&gt; SO WE USED THAT AS A BASIS
FOR OUR WORK TO MEANT TO HELP
MANAGE COSTS.
&gt;&gt; WE MADE SOME SMALL
REDUCTIONS IN THE TOTAL SERVICE
HOURS THAT WE HAD SCENARIO AND
REPLACED SOME OF THE DEDICATED
BUS LANES THAT WE HAD THERE
WITH OTHER TRANSIT PRIORITY
FEATURES TO HELP CONTAIN
CAPITAL COSTS.
&gt;&gt; WE ALSO OPTIMIZE THE NETWORK
TO MINIMIZE ALL TRAVEL TIMES
AND FOR THE SERVICE THAT WE
PLAN TO BUILD WE ARE
PRIORITIZING AREAS WITH LOWER
ACCESS TO HOUSING, EDUCATION,
EMPLOYMENT AND HEALTH CARE TO
ALIGN WITH THE GOALS WE&apos;VE
TALKED ABOUT.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS NETWORK MAP SHOWS
HOW WE IMAGINED THE RIDE COULD
LOOK IN TWENTY FORTY FIVE.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS IN ESSENCE
SUMMARIZES OUR DRAFT PLAN AND
ALL OF THE ROUTES HAVE BEEN
SELECTED TO OPTIMIZE TRAVEL
TIMES WHICH ENSURES THAT AREAS
WITH LOW ACCESS TO OPPORTUNITY
OPPORTUNE HAVE ACCESS TO HIGH
FREQUENCY TRANSIT.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE TWO FULL SCALE BUS
RAPID TRANSIT LINES SHOWN IN
THAT DARK RED AND THEY FORM THE
BACKBONE OF OUR SYSTEM.
THEY WILL BE A COMBINATION
OF BOTH FULL BUS RAPID TRANSIT
WITH FULLY DEDICATED SEGREGATED
LANES AND BRT LEICHT WHICH HAS
OTHER TRANSIT PRIORITY FEATURES
TO HELP IT MOVE QUICKLY THROUGH
TRAFFIC.
&gt;&gt; BUT TOGETHER THESE TWO THESE
TWO RED LINES THESE TWO BRT
LINES CREATE STRONG EASTWEST
AND NORTH-SOUTH CONNECTIONS
THAT WE CAN BUILD FROM OTHER
MAIN ROUTES ARE SERVED BY
PRIORITY AND EXPRESS SERVICES
AND THEY&apos;RE SHOWN IN DARK BLUE
WHICH HAVE OTHER TOP PRIORITY
FEATURES AND FEWER STOPS TO
MAKE TRIPS FASTER.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE AN EXTENSIVE HIGH
FREQUENCY NETWORK SHOWN IN
LIGHT BLUE THAT STRETCHES
ACROSS THE ENTIRE EAST L.A.
CREATING BETTER, FASTER AND
RELIABLE CONNECTIONS AND
WAITING AND TRANSFERRING ACROSS
THE SERVICE WILL BE IMPROVED
ESPECIALLY AT OUR BUSIEST
LOCATIONS WHERE WE&apos;RE
INTRODUCING UPGRADES AND IN
SOME CASES NEW TRANSIT HUBS
SHOWN IN THOSE YELLOW DOTS ON
THE MAP.
&gt;&gt; SO SOME OF THE OTHER
FEATURES OF THE PLAN THAT WE
WANT TO TALK ABOUT INTRODUCE
ARE SUMMARIZED ON THE SLIDE.
SO FIRST WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT
OPTIC SERVICE.
IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT WE HEARD A
LOT ABOUT THROUGH OUR
ENGAGEMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO IMPROVING OUR SERVICE
WILL HELP PEOPLE WHO RELY ON
TRANSIT FOR ALL THEIR
TRANSPORTATION AND NEED IT MOST
AND THIS INCLUDES ESSENTIAL AND
LOWER WAGE WORKERS, WOMEN
STUDENTS AND SENIORS.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;VE BUILT ACCESSIBILITY
INTO THIS PLAN AT EVERY LEVEL
INCLUDING OUR VEHICLES, BUS
STOPS, TRANSIT HUBS, FAIR
PAYMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT
AS THE WHOLE SYSTEM IS
TRANSFORMED WE&apos;RE ABLE TO
ENSURE BETTER INTEGRATION AND
COORDINATED PLANNING BETWEEN
ALL OF OUR SERVICE WHICH
INCLUDES INTEGRATION OF FIXED
ROUTE SERVICES WITH A RIDE
WE&apos;RE PLANNING TO MODERNIZE OUR
FAIR SHARE COLLECTION AND
PLANNING SYSTEMS AND THERE WILL
ALSO BE EXTERNAL FACTORS BEYOND
OUR CONTROL THAT WE ARE AWARE
OF OR THAT WE RECOGNIZE AND
THAT&apos;S WHY WE&apos;RE PLANNING TO
SPEND PARTNERSHIPS WITH
EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS LIKE
MUNICIPALITIES.
&gt;&gt; THE REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
AUTHORITY, THE RTA, THE
UNIVERSITIES AND COMMUNITY
GROUPS.
&gt;&gt; SOME OF THESE COLLABORATIONS
CAN HELP US WITH FIRST AND LAST
MILE SOLUTION GETTING TO AND
FROM THE BUS EVERY STOP AND
STATION MAY REQUIRE A DIFFERENT
SOLUTION WHETHER IT BE ON
DEMAND SERVICES, BIKE SHARING,
SCOOTER SHARING, A BETTER
SIDEWALK SNOW CLEARING STOPS
BUT TOGETHER THESE WILL MAKE IT
EASIER FOR EVERYONE TO USE OUR
IMPROVED SERVICES.
&gt;&gt; SO HAPPY TO TALK ABOUT ANY
OF THESE IN MORE DETAIL AFTER
HOW WE CONNECT TO THE LARGER
REGION OR TO THE TO THE
EXPANDED REGION SURROUNDING OUR
SERVICE IS ALSO CRITICAL TO OUR
LONG TERM SUCCESS.
SO WHILE THE PARTICULARS
OF THOSE CONNECTIONS DEPEND ON
PARTNERSHIPS AND THEY ALSO
DEPEND QUITE FRANKLY ON OUTSIDE
FUNDING WE HAVE IDENTIFIED SOME
KEY ELEMENTS TO WORK TOWARD ON
THE MAP ON THE RIGHT OR
SURROUNDING THE MAP YOU CAN SEE
THE LIGHT GREEN SHOWS GENERAL
AREAS WHERE WE CAN ADD MORE
PARKING LOTS CONNECTED TO OUR
SERVICE AREA WITH EXPRESS BUS
AS SHOWN IN DARKBLOOM
CONNECTING CUSTOMERS IN D WILL
HELP TO DRAW RIDERS IN FROM A
BROADER AREA BUT PROVIDING
REGIONAL CONNECTIONS ALL AROUND
ARE OUR REGULAR SERVICE AREA.
SO I KNOW THAT WAS A WHIRLWIND
SUMMARY BUT REALLY WHAT WE
WANTED TO TO GET TO IS ALSO
TALK TO YOU A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
HOW THIS IS GOING TO BE STAGED
OVER FIVE YEAR INCREMENTS TO
BUILD OUT THE PLAN OVER THE
NEXT TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
SO STARTING WITH WHAT CAN BE
DONE IN THE SHORT TERM BETWEEN
TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND TWENTY
TWENTY EIGHT, OUR FOCUS WOULD
BE ON SERVICE IMPROVEMENTS THAT
REQUIRE LESS INFRASTRUCTURE BUT
STILL ALLOW US TO INCREASE
EQUITY GROWTH RIDERSHIP AND SET
THE GROUNDWORK FOR FUTURE
STAGES.
THIS INCLUDES A PILOT EXPRESSEN
UNWASHED NILE AVENUE AND A
MINIMUM 30 MINUTE FREQUENCY ALL
ROUTES DURING THE DAYTIME
INCLUDING WEEKENDS PROVIDING
BETTER OFF PEAK SERVICE THAT WE
TALKED ABOUT THAT I TALKED
ABOUT EARLIER.
WHAT WE HEARD FROM THE FEEDBACK
THAT WE RECEIVED WAS THAT
PEOPLE WHO ARE MOST DEPENDENT
ON TRANSIT NEEDED AT ALL TIMES.
SO WE&apos;RE FOCUSING OUR SERVICE
IMPROVEMENTS IN THIS STAGE ON
PROVIDING EARLIER AND LATER
BUSSES WHILE EXPANDING AND
ENHANCING NITRITE.
&gt;&gt; OUR FIXED OUR REGULAR FIXED
ROUTE SERVICE WILL START TO
BECOME MORE ACCESSIBLE AS WELL
WHICH WILL ALLOW US BETTER
INTEGRATION WITH THE RIGHT
MAJOR CAPITAL PROJECTS THAT WE
WOULD START TO UNDERTAKE IN
THIS PHASE PHASE IS UPGRADING
THE YPSILANTI TRANSIT CENTER
AND THE TRANSIT CENTER.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;D ALSO START IN THIS
PHASE THE DESIGN WORK ON A NEW
GARAGE AND FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BUS RAPID
TRANSIT AND TRANSIT PRIORITY
FEATURES STARTING IN TWENTY
TWENTY NINE.
&gt;&gt; THE SECOND PHASE OF THE PLAN
INCLUDES SIGNIFICANT INCREASES
IN SERVICE AND AN EXPANDED BUS
FLEET.
&gt;&gt; WE EVENTUALLY PLAN TO BUILD
A FULL BRT LINE ON WASHINGTON
AVENUE.
AS I SAID EARLIER BUT THAT&apos;S
GOING TO TAKE TIME AND TO PLAN
AND CONSTRUCT IN THIS PHASE WE
WOULD ENHANCE THE EXPRESS
SERVICE ON WASHTENAW WITH
BETTER STOPS.
Q JUMP LANES AND TRANSIT
FEATURES ALONG THE ROUTE AND
THROUGH
CENTRAL THROUGHOUT
CENTRAL AND ARBOR.
WE&apos;RE ALSO INTRODUCED AN
EXPRESS ROUTE ON THE NORTH
SOUTH CORRIDOR FROM BORROWED
MOLLE TO THE PLYMOUTH ROAD
NETWORK PLYMOUTH ROAD PARK AND
PLYMOUTH ROAD PARK AND RIDE AND
CREATE PRIORITY SERVICE ON THE
MAIN PLYMOUTH AND PACKARD
ELSWORTH CORRIDORS A FINALLY IN
A STAGE WE&apos;LL ALSO CONSTRUCT
THE BUS GARAGE THAT WE DESIGNED
IN PHASE ONE AS WELL AS OUR
FIRST TRANSIT HUB NEAR
BRIARWOOD MALL FROM TWENTY
TWENTY THREE TO TWENTY TWENTY
TWENTY THIRTY EIGHT.
&gt;&gt; ALIJA IMPROVEMENTS WILL BE
MADE TO THE BACKBONE OF THE
NETWORK SO HERE WILL INTRODUCE
THE BUILD OUT THE FULL BUS
RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM ON
WASHTENAW AVENUE A NORTH SOUTH
BRT LIGHT FROM THE MALL TO THE
PLYMOUTH PARK AND RIDE A NEW
EXPRESS ROUTE ON I-95 IN A
PRIORITY ROUTE ON PACARD
EISENHOWER.
&gt;&gt; THESE UPGRADES WILL BE
COUPLED WITH TRANSIT PARTY
ENHANCEMENTS ACROSS THE SERVICE
AREA AND ALSO TO NEW TRANSIT
HUBS.
&gt;&gt; THAT WOULD BE A PLANNED
INTRODUCED AT CARPENTER
ELSWORTH AND JACKSON MAPLE IN
OUR LAST PHASE FROM TWENTY
THIRTY NINE TO TWENTY FORTY
FIVE WE WOULD CONTINUE TO
UPGRADE THE BACKBONE OF THE
NETWORK SO THAT WE CAN EXPAND
OUR HIGH FREQUENCY NETWORKS
FURTHER ACROSS THE ENTIRE
SERVICE AREA SO HERE IT WOULD
INCLUDE A COMBINATION OF THE
FULL BRT AND BRT LIGHT ON THE
NORTH SOUTH CORRIDOR FROM
BRIGHTWOOD MULTIPLE SMITH PARK
AND AS YOU CAN SEE AND A BRT
LIGHT EXTENSION ALSO ON HERE ON
TO HERE ON JACKSON JUST WEST
OF OF DOWNTOWN.
&gt;&gt; I WILL ALSO BUILD A NEW
TRANSIT HUB IN PLYMOUTH.
AND THE OTHER KEY THING WE&apos;RE
EXCITED TO TO TALK ABOUT IN
THIS KEY STAGE WOULD BE THE
THAT WE WOULD EXPECT BY THIS
POINT THE FLEET WOULD BE ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT ZERO EMISSIONS
CREATING AN EFFICIENT,
CONVENIENT AND CLEAN WAY TO GET
AROUND WITH THE SERVICE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THAT WAS A LOT I KNOW TO TO
GO OVER AND IN 12 MINUTES I
JUST WANT TO SPEND A FEW
MINUTES SUMMARIZING THE KEY
BENEFITS AND ALSO TALKING ABOUT
THE COSTS TO BUILD OUT THIS
PLAN.
&gt;&gt; SO ALL OF THESE CHANGES ARE
GOING TO HAVE REAL MEASURABLE
BENEFITS FOR THE WHOLE
COMMUNITY AND NOT JUST
CUSTOMERS.
AND THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT WAS
WE WE HEARD LOUD AND CLEAR LAST
TIME WAS THAT WE REALLY NEED TO
TALK ABOUT THE BROADER
COMMUNITY BENEFITS SO OUR
SERVICE ENHANCEMENTS WILL MEAN
MORE EQUITABLE ACCESS TO HIGH
QUALITY TRANSPORTATION FOR
JOBS, EDUCATION AND HOUSING AND
THAT GIVES MORE OPPORTUNITIES
TO THOSE WHO NEED IT MOST.
&gt;&gt; MORE PEOPLE WILL BE USING
TRANSIT WHICH WILL MEAN MORE
VIBRANT AND WALKABLE
COMMUNITIES AND SYSTEMS.
&gt;&gt; TRANSIT IS A MORE EFFICIENT
WAY TO MOVE.
LOTS OF PEOPLE ARE OUR
COMMUNITY WOULD REQUIRE LESS
INFRASTRUCTURE SUCH AS PARKING
,REDUCING THE OVERALL COST
BURDEN OF TRANSPORTATION
SERVICES.
FEWER CARS ON CARS ON THE ROAD
WOULD ALSO MEAN LESS POLLUTION
AND A HEALTHY ENVIRONMENT FOR
EVERYONE AND FINALLY WOULD ALSO
MEAN REDUCED TRAFFIC CONGESTION
FOR EVERYONE.
&gt;&gt; CONNECTING THIS BACK TO THE
GOALS THAT WE TALKED ABOUT
EARLIER, OUR CHANGES ARE GOING
TO RESULT IN PROJECTED
RIDERSHIP INCREASE OF UPWARDS
OF ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY TO ONE
HUNDRED SIXTY FIVE PERCENT.
THIS IS THANKS TO A THIRTY NINE
PERCENT FASTER SERVICE.
THE SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN OFF
PEAK SERVICE THAT I TALKED
ABOUT AND DEDICATED INVESTMENT
FOR INNOVATION AND INNOVATION
AND MODERNIZATION.
WE HAVE ONE HUNDRED PERCENT
INCREASE IN SERVICE WITH ONE
HUNDRED TWENTY THREE PERCENT
INCREASE IN SERVICE FOR LOW
OPPORTUNITY AREAS.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE REDUCING
TRANSPORTATION EMISSIONS BY
SEVEN TO 11 PERCENT AND AN
ANNUAL REDUCTION CAR TRIPS BY
SIX POINT NINE MILLION.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S A LOT OF A LOT OF TRIPS
WE&apos;RE TAKING OFF THE ROAD WILL
ALSO HELPING BUSINESSES BY
HELPING WORKERS GET TO THEIR
JOBS FASTER AND MORE RELIABLY
THROUGH THE HIGH FREQUENCY
TRANSIT NETWORK.
SO WE WE DON&apos;T KNOW THE FUTURE
PERFECTLY OF COURSE OR OUR PLAN
DOES GIVE US TARGETS TO REACH
FOR OR WHILE ALLOWING US TO BE
FLEXIBLE.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S CONDITIONS AND
TECHNOLOGIES CHANGE.
IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT THE
PLAN WILL NEED TO BE UPDATED
EVERY FIVE TO 10 YEARS AS THE
SERVICES INCREASE THE COST
OF PROVIDING SERVICE INCREASES
TO THE DAY TO DAY COSTS LIKE
EMPLOYEE WAGES, FUEL AND BUS
MAINTENANCE OPERATING COSTS ARE
PAID FROM LOCAL PROPERTY TAXES,
STATE AND FEDERAL GRANTS AND
PASSENGER FARES.
AND SO YOU CAN SEE HERE HOW OUR
OPERATING COSTS ARE EXPECTED TO
GROW OVER THE COURSE OF THE
PLAN.
YOU ALSO SEE HERE A SUMMARY
OF THE GROWTH IN CAPITAL COSTS
WHICH I&apos;LL TALK ABOUT FURTHER
ON THE NEXT SLIDE.
SO LET&apos;S TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT
WHERE THE INVESTMENTS WILL GO
OVER THE TWENTY FIVE YEAR LIFE
OF THIS PLAN.
SO THIS IS THE FOCUSING ON THE
CAPITAL COSTS.
SO WE EXPECT TO INVEST ABOUT 20
MILLION DOLLARS IN INNOVATION
AND TECHNOLOGY.
FORTY FIVE MILLION INTO NEW
VEHICLES, ONE HUNDRED AND
THIRTEEN MILLION DOLLARS INTO
NEW FACILITIES AND ONE HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY FIVE MILLION ON THE
PLUS EXCITING BUS RAPID TRANSIT
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT.
&gt;&gt; BUT IT&apos;S IMPORTANT TO ALSO
FLAGGED THAT A LARGE PART
OF THE COSTS IN THIS PLAN TWO
HUNDRED AND NINETY EIGHT
MILLION TO BE EXACT ARE TIED TO
STATE OF GOOD REPAIR AND
VEHICLE REPLACEMENT PROJECTS.
&gt;&gt; THE FUNDING FOR THESE
INVESTMENTS WILL COME FROM A
FROM A VARIETY OF SOURCES SIX
PERCENT THAT WILL COME FROM
EXISTING CAPITAL RESERVES THAT
THE RIGHT HAS.
&gt;&gt; FORTY SEVEN PERCENT OF THE
FUNDING WILL COME FROM EXISTING
STATE AND FEDERAL FUNDING
PROGRAMS THAT ARE STABLE AND
CAN BE RELIED ON FOR LONG TERM
INVESTMENTS SUCH AS THIS.
&gt;&gt; WE ALSO ANTICIPATE THIRTY
ONE PERCENT OF THE FUNDING WILL
COME FROM DISCRETIONARY GRANT
PROGRAMS OFFERED BY STATE AND
FEDERAL PARTNERS THAT ARE
SPECIFICALLY GEARED TOWARDS BRT
AND STATE GOOD REPAIR PROGRAMS.
&gt;&gt; SIXTEEN PERCENT THE FUNDING
SOURCES HAVE NOT YET BEEN
IDENTIFIED THAT THAT DOES SEEM
LIKE A LOT AND IT IS
SUBSTANTIAL.
BUT REMEMBER THAT OVER TWENTY
FIVE YEARS WE EXPECT AND HAVE
HAD DISCUSSIONS WITH STAFF
ABOUT NEW AND DIFFERENT
OPPORTUNITIES THAT COULD BECOME
AVAILABLE ON THE MUNICIPAL,
STATE AND FEDERAL LEVEL.
&gt;&gt; OVERALL WE BELIEVE THIS
FINANCIAL PLAN IS ACHIEVABLE
BUT DOES ALSO PROVIDE
FLEXIBILITY TO THE RIDE SHOULD
ANY SURPRISES ARISE ALONG THE
THE JOURNEY.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT CONCLUDES THE
DESCRIPTION THE SUMMARY OF OUR
PLAN.
&gt;&gt; WE WANT TO I WANT TO THANK
YOU FOR FOR GIVING ME THE TIME
I APPREC I WANT A COUPLE
OF MINUTES OVER BUT AT THIS
POINT I&apos;LL TURN IT BACK OVER TO
YOU AND WE CAN GO OVER IT.
&gt;&gt; ANY QUESTIONS THAT YOU MIGHT
HAVE AND AGAIN I JUST WANT TO
ENCOURAGE ALL OF YOU TO PROVIDE
FEEDBACK THROUGH ANY MEANS THAT
YOU SEE ON THE SCREEN.
OBVIOUSLY TODAY AS WELL AND
THEN THROUGH YOUR NETWORKS IF
YOU CAN SHARE THAT WE DO HAVE A
SURVEY LAUNCHED SLINKED ON THE
RUG AND WE WANT TO GET AS MUCH
FEEDBACK FROM THE COMMUNITY
PUBLIC AS POSSIBLE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS,
COMMISSIONER ROVEN I THANK YOU.
THIS IS GREAT.
I&apos;M SUPER EXCITED TO SEE
INCREASED FREQUENCY VERY
EXCITED TO SEE THE IDEA OF LIKE
SEPARATED US RAPID TRANSIT
LANES UM, I HAVE A QUESTION
THAT MAY BE OUTSIDE OF THE
SCOPE OF THIS PROJECT SO THAT&apos;S
FINE.
UM SO BUT UM I REALLY LIKE TO
BE ABLE TO TAKE MY BIKE ON THE
BUS AND SORT OF USE THAT TO GET
ME MORE CONNECTIVITY SO ONE
THING I WAS THINKING ABOUT WAS
WHETHER YOU HAD AS PART OF THIS
AND THINKING ABOUT HOW TO
ENABLE MORE PEOPLE TO TAKE
THEIR BIKES.
MOST OF THE BUSSES I SEE
CURRENTLY ONLY HAVE TO BIKE
RACKS AND ARE KIND OF GEARED
TOWARDS SMALLER BIKES SO WELL I
SHOULD SAY LIKE REGULAR SIZED
BIKES AND WITH A LOT OF PEOPLE
PICKING UP BIKES, CARGO I JUST
WONDERED IF THAT WAS ANYTHING
THAT YOU ALL HAD CONSIDERED.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THAT,
COMMISSIONER.
AND I&apos;LL ACTUALLY LET FORESTER
TALK ABOUT IN TERMS OF THE
SPECIFICS AROUND BIKE RACKS BUT
WHAT THE PIECE THAT I WOULD
CONNECT TO THIS THOUGH AND
KHOLOUD IS ONE OF THE THINGS
THE FOCUS AREAS FOR US HAS BEEN
AROUND FIRST AND LAST MILE
CONNECTIVITY AND RECOGNIZING
THAT FOR A NETWORK TO BE
SUCCESS SEFL IT NEEDS TO BE
ADEQUATELY AND STRONGLY
INTEGRATED THE COMMUNITY AROUND
IT.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE&apos;RE
EXCITED BY THAT OBVIOUSLY WE
DIDN&apos;T GET TO TALK ABOUT HERE
IN DETAIL IS WE&apos;VE ACTUALLY
BUILT INTO THE PLANNING AND THE
FUNDING SPECIFIC DOLLARS TO
ENABLE THE RIDE TO WORK ON
DEVELOPING NEW IDEAS AND
INTEGRATIONS FIRST AND LAST
MILE OPPORTUNITIES WHETHER IT
IS BY CRACK&apos;S WHETHER IT IS
BIKE SHARE INTEGRATION, WHETHER
IT IS WHATEVER IT IS THAT MIGHT
COME UP IN TEN YEARS FROM NOW
THAT WE HAVEN&apos;T EVEN THOUGHT
ABOUT THERE IS GOING TO BE
SUSTAINED FUNDING OR DEDICATED
FUNDING WITHIN THE PLAN AND
WITHIN THE RIDE TO ALLOW THEM
TO CONTINUOUSLY LOOK AT AND
FIND NEW AND EXCITING WAYS TO
TO INTEGRATE.
OBVIOUSLY BIKE RACKS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE ALL
FAMILIAR WITH AND I DON&apos;T KNOW
MATT OR FORCED IF YOU WANT TO
TALK TO BUT THE SPECIFICS
AROUND CURRENT PLANS BUT I JUST
WANTED TO FLAG THAT LONG TERM
VISION AROUND CONTINUOUSLY
WORKING ON FIRST AND LAST MILE
SOLUTIONS.
&gt;&gt; THANK THANKS YOU ALL THIS IS
MATT AND I&apos;LL CHIME I THINK YOU
HAVE ALL THE ANSWERS CORRECT
WITHIN THE REALM OF THE CURRENT
TECHNOLOGY WE HAVE YOU&apos;RE RIGHT
THE RACKS ON THE FRONT OF THE
BIKES ONLY TAKE TWO BIKES.
THEY ARE REGULAR SIZE NOT THE
CARGO BIKES OR TANDEM BIKES
GOING FORWARD IN THE FUTURE
THERE MAY BE NEW OPPORTUNITIES
TO DO MORE.
CERTAINLY BIKE RACKS AND BIKE
LOCKERS ARE THINGS WE CAN
ACCOMMODATE AND EXPAND AND I
THINK THAT&apos;S KIND OF CAPTURED
SOME OF LOOK FOR US SAID WITH
CURRENT TECHNOLOGY
WHAT WE HAVE
IT&apos;S A BIT OF A TRADEOFF IN
TERMS OF SPACE.
A LARGE BIKE ON THE BUS IS
SOMETHING THAT&apos;S GOING TO BUMP
INTO SOMEONE IN A WHEELCHAIR
FOR EXAMPLE.
SO THERE ARE RESTRICTIONS YOU
CAN&apos;T BRING THE ON THE BUS THE
BIKE RACK ON THE FRONT WHEN
IT&apos;S DEPLOYED EXTENDS THE
LENGTH OF THE VEHICLE I THINK
TWO OR THREE FEET AND WE&apos;RE
STARTING TO HAVE TROUBLE MAKING
SOME TURNS IN DOWNTOWN.
&gt;&gt; WE DID GET A REQUEST FROM I
THINK THE LEAGUE OF BICYCLISTS
BEFORE THE PANDEMIC TO LOOK AT
LAUDRUP.
WE DID EXPLORE THAT THE THERE
PROBABLY NOT GOING TO BE
FEASIBLE SIMPLY BECAUSE OF ALL
THE MANEUVERING THROUGH
DOWNTOWN THAT WE HAD TO DO.
BUT WE&apos;RE GOING TO KEEP LOOKING
AT LIKE YOU&apos;VE ALL SAID, UNTIL
WE FIND A SOLUTION THAT REALLY
ALLOWS PEOPLE TO DO EVERYTHING
THEY WANT TO DO WITH THEIR
BIKES.
THE OTHER THE OTHER IDEA THAT
WE COULD FLOAT THAT AGAIN WOULD
WOULD TIE IN WELL TO SOME
OF OUR PLANS AS WE LOOK AT
BUILDING OUT TRANSIT HUBS AND
EVEN WITH THE UPGRADES TO MAYBE
THE TRANSIT CENTER, MAYBE
THERE&apos;S OPPORTUNITY TO BUILD
SECURE PARKING FOR BIKES OR
JUST MORE DEDICATED SPACE TO
LEAVE YOUR BIKE BEHIND AND AND
CONNECT CONNECTED TO THE
NETWORK.
&gt;&gt; AND YOU KNOW, WE HAVE A
SERIES OF TRANSIT HUBS THAT
WE&apos;RE PLANNING SO IT&apos;LL GIVE
YOU MORE PLACES TO LEAVE YOUR
BIKE IN A SECURE SPOT.
THANK YOU.
COMMISSIONER WINIKOFF
TRANSPORTATION.
MY SPECIAL PAYMENT OPTIONS WHAT
I LOVED ABOUT TAKE THE BUS TO
MY HOMETOWN OF MIAMI IS BEING
ABLE TO PAY QUICKLY WITH GOOGLE
PAY OR APPLE PAY ON A PHONE.
HOW IN WHAT TIME FRAME COULD BE
IMPLEMENTED FOR ALL THAT FAR
OUT?
I THINK IN THE TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE ONWARD SLIDE.
YES.
ACTUALLY ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE WERE KIND EXCITED BY IS THAT
THE RIGHT ACTUALLY HAS BEEN
DOING SOME GOOD WORK IN THIS
AREA AROUND INNOVATING FARE
PAYMENTS AND LOOKING AT A
SOLUTIONS AND SO THEY HAVE
INTRODUCED SOME SOME FAIRLY
MODERN FAIR PAYMENT OPTIONS
OVER THE PAST YEARS.
AND AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WE&apos;VE SORT OF FOCUSED ON
THROUGH THE PLAN IS TO CONTINUE
TO INNOVATE AND CONTINUE TO
DEVELOP THAT AND SO AT EACH
STAGE REALLY THERE IS A NEW
PIECE, A NEW ELEMENT THAT WE&apos;RE
LOOKING AT INCLUDING WHAT YOU
ALLUDED TO BUT THEN ALSO
LOOKING AT POTENTIALLY TEN
YEARS OUT REGIONAL INTEGRATION
WITH WITH THE GREATER WITH
DETROIT WITH THE GREATER
DETROIT AREA AND THE GREATER
YEAH.
&gt;&gt; SO SO YES.
I THINK THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S OTHER
ELEMENTS THAT WE&apos;VE BUILT INTO
THE PLAN AROUND AROUND AROUND
BUILDING THE FARE COLLECTION
SYSTEM IT JUST GOING TO FOLLOW
ON THAT BECAUSE THE TECHNOLOGY
EXISTS ALREADY AND SO I WOULD
LOVE TO SEE SOME MOVEMENT ON
THAT SOONER ESPECIALLY SORT
OF WE&apos;RE TRYING TO GET PEOPLE
ON THE BUS POST PANDEMIC MAKING
IT MUCH EASIER THAN IT
CURRENTLY IS TO PAY THOSE FARES
I THINK FEELS REALLY IMPORTANT
.
WELL, WE&apos;LL TAKE THAT AWAY AND
CONSIDER THAT AS A FEEDBACK IN
TERMS OF WHERE PRIORITIES
SHOULD I APPRECIATE THAT THAT
SENTIMENT?
I THINK IT&apos;S SOMETHING WE
RECOGNIZE FOR COLLECTION IS ONE
OF THOSE THINGS THAT&apos;S ON ITS
SURFACE CAN SEEM SIMPLE BUT
HAVING MY BACKGROUND IS
ACTUALLY TRANSIT TECHNOLOGY AND
HAVING LIVED THROUGH SOME
TRANSIT FARE TECHNOLOGY
IMPLEMENTATIONS THEY CAN GET
VERY MESSY VERY QUICKLY AND
YEAH SO I THINK I THINK WE I
THINK WE WOULD ALL LIKE TO SEE
IT DONE SOONER.
I THINK WE&apos;LL WE CAN HAVE
DISCUSSIONS WITH THE RIDE TO
SEE WHERE AND WHICH ELEMENTS
CAN BE PRIORITIZED AND MOVED
QUICKLY ON.
&gt;&gt; DID YOU HAVE ANOTHER
QUESTION RAISE YOUR HAND JUST
STOP THAT OK?
YEAH IT&apos;S THE SAME THING.
OTHER QUESTIONS COMMENTS
QUESTIONABLE AND I SAID THE
NEXT AGENDA ITEM IS ABOUT A
MILLAGE AND SO I JUST WONDERED
WHERE THAT MONEY FIT INTO THE
PIE CHART WE JUST SAW IS THAT
PART OF THE SIXTEEN PERCENT
THAT&apos;S ON ACCOUNTED FOR OR HOW
DOES THAT FIT?
SO THE MARRIAGE AND MATT CAN
CAN SPEAK TO AFTER SO IS MORE
FOCUSED ON THE OPERATING
DOLLARS WHEREAS THE THE NUMBER
THAT YOU&apos;RE REFERRING TO THE
SIXTEEN PERCENT IS RELATED TO
THE CAPITAL FUNDS AND SO WE
HAVE YOU KNOW WE TALKED ABOUT
IT BEING AS HOW DID I PHRASE IT
IN THE PRESENTATION ON
ACCOUNTED FOR BUT UNIDENTIFIED
SOURCE FAR AS JUST LOOKING FOR
THE TERM WE&apos;VE ACTUALLY HAD
DISCUSSIONS WITH THE RIGHT
ABOUT SPECIFIC TOOLS THAT ARE
AVAILABLE.
THERE&apos;S A VARIETY OF TOOLS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE AND WE&apos;VE HAD
THOSE DISCUSSIONS AND THE
REALITY IS AND WE DIDN&apos;T WANT
TO PUT IT FORWARD AT THIS STAGE
BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE VERY EARLY
THOUGHTS IN TERMS OF WHICH
WOULD WORK BEST AND AND HOW TO
BEST MANEUVER THEM AND THE
REALITY IS THAT YOU TYPICALLY
WOULD WANT TO NEED TO HAVE A
STRONG VISION, A STRONG PLAN IN
PLACE BEFORE YOU START TO GO
DOWN THE PATH OF TALKING ABOUT
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS,
PARKING FEES, THE MULTIUSE
DEVELOPMENT COST, VALUE CAPTURE
TAX, ALL OF THESE TOOLS THAT
ARE AVAILABLE TO DIFFERENT
REGIONS, DIFFERENT MINISUB
MUNICIPALITIES USE THEY&apos;RE
AVAILABLE TO YOU BUT ULTIMATELY
YOU NEED TO HAVE THE WHY FIRST
.
WHY WOULD YOU GO ABOUT HAVING
THOSE DISCUSSIONS WITH WITH
STAKEHOLDERS YOU FIRST NEED TO
HAVE THAT VISION IN PLACE
THAT&apos;S DIFFERENT THAN THE
MILLAGE PIECE THAT MATT WILL
TALK TO YOU ABOUT WHICH IS MORE
FOCUSED ON THE OPERATING
DOLLARS TO TO SUSTAIN THE
SERVICE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS
.
I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT THE THE
TRANSIT CENTER UPGRADES THAT
ARE IN THERE.
I FEEL LIKE SO OFTEN IN THE US
WE HAVE THESE SORT OF LIKE
HUMONGOUS TRANSIT CENTERS IN
SITUATIONS WHERE MAYBE ALL WE
NEED IS A BENCH AND A SHELTER
AND A PLATFORM AND SO I&apos;M
CURIOUS SPECIFICALLY ABOUT
THOSE THOSE PIECES OF PLAN
CERTAINLY AND FORCED TO DO YOU
WANT TO TAKE THAT SO TO TAKE
THAT SO I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW MUCH
YOU HAVE HEARD THE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT JUST SOUTH
OF THE CENTER.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S PART OF THAT AS A
PART OF THAT PROJECT WE&apos;VE BEEN
WORKING AS THE HOUSING
COMMISSION ALSO OF COURSE THE
CITY DDA AND TRY TO THE PARKING
BOTH OFF STREET IS A LITTLE BIT
SAFER AND MUCH MORE EASIER FOR
CUSTOMERS TO TRANSFER BETWEEN
BUSSES TO BE THE IDEAL FOR THE
TRANSIT CENTER UPGRADE WILL BE
JUST ADDED EXTRA LANE YOU KNOW,
AS PART OF THE NEW DEVELOPMENT
AND THE MOST BUSSES FROM THE
STREET PARKING TO OUR STREET
LOADING SAFER FOR EVERYBODY AND
THEN THERE ARE ALSO SOME SOME
STREET FURNITURE OR A STREET
LANDSCAPING IMPROVEMENT ALONG
FOURTH AVENUE AND THE LANE
CONFIGURATION TRY TO MAKE
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING SAFELY AND
A BUS OPERATION IS BASICALLY TO
THE TRY CENTER UPGRADE BECAUSE
WE OPERATE ON STREET RIGHT NOW
AND ALL BUSSES PARK ON THE
STREET SO AND THE BAR IS
REALLY, REALLY SMALL SO WE WANT
TO EXPAND THAT AND MAYBE
REBUILD THE WHOLE TERMINAL,
EITHER MAKE IT OBSOLETE OR A
BIGGER BUILDING.
WE DON&apos;T WE WANT TO HAVE A
CONCEPT AT THE MOMENT BUT NEXT
STEP WOULD BE, YOU KNOW, MORE
INTO MORE DETAILED DESIGN.
SO THE CONCEPT WOULD BE
PROBABLY AVAILABLE OPERATION
AND THAT&apos;S KIND OF THE PLAN WE
INCLUDED IN THIS AS PART OF THE
FIRST STAGE OF IMPLEMENTATION
AND THAT&apos;S SUPER HELPFUL.
&gt;&gt; IT WOULD BE GREAT TO GET
MORE BUSSES OUT FOR AS MY BIKE
THROUGH THERE A LOT AND IT&apos;S A
LITTLE HARROWING BEING
SURROUNDED BY BUSSES SO THAT
ACTUALLY SOUNDS GREAT TO ME.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS QUESTIONS?
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
WELL THEN I THINK WE CAN MOVE
ON TO THE TRANSIT VILLAGE WHICH
I THINK IS THE SAME THE SAME
CREW.
&gt;&gt; GUESS IF THEY DON&apos;T MIND
I&apos;LL TAKE IT FROM HERE.
THANK YOU.
YOU ALL YOUR TEAM GREAT JOB.
YOU&apos;RE WELCOME TO HANG OUT IF
YOU LIKE.
SO YOU&apos;VE ALL IN HIS GROUP.
WE&apos;RE SPEAKING ABOUT OUR TWENTY
FIVE YEAR PLAN.
I&apos;M HERE TODAY TO TALK ABOUT
THE FIVE YEAR SO WHILE WE HAVE
A FEW MINUTES AND WE HAVE A LOT
OF ON THE AGENDA YET TODAY SO
WHAT I&apos;M GOING TO DO IS TRY TO
INTRODUCE A BIG SUBJECT AND A
PROPOSAL.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;LL SHARE MY SCREEN IN A
MOMENT, WALK YOU THROUGH SOME
MATERIAL I BELIEVE WAS
CIRCULATED TO YOU AND OTHER
VIEWERS OF THIS WEBCAST MAY
FIND INTERESTING.
SO YOU&apos;VE ALL MENTIONED AT
SEVERAL POINTS IN HIS
PRESENTATION SORT OF THE FAZING
TAKING A TWENTY FIVE YEAR PLAN
AND TURNING IT INTO FIVE FIVE
YEAR PLANS.
THAT&apos;S NOT BECAUSE OF ANY
SOVIET PREDISPOSITION FOR FIVE
YEAR PLANS.
STATE LAW SAYS WE CAN ONLY GO
FOR FIVE YEAR COLLEGES SO
THAT&apos;S WHY THAT ALL BREAKS DOWN
SO YOU MENTIONED A COUPLE
OF TIMES THAT THE PUBLIC
INVOLVEMENT FOR A LONG RANGE
PLAN WE TALK TO A LOT OF PEOPLE
AND WE ASK THEM WHAT DO YOU
WANT YOUR TRANSIT SYSTEM TO
EVOLVE INTO?
WHERE DO YOU WANT IT TO BE?
AND WE REALLY HEARD AND YOU&apos;VE
ALL SAID A LOT OF PEOPLE SAID
TRANSFORMATIONAL CHANGE THEY
WANTED THE BIGGEST, MOST
AGGRESSIVE APPROACH TO
EXPANDING PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
THAT THAT WAS POSSIBLE.
&gt;&gt; THIS RAIL LINES UP WITH A
LOT OF THE POLICY DOCUMENTS
THAT HAVE COME OUT OF CITY HALL
RECENTLY, THINGS LIKE A TWO
ZERO THE CARBON NEUTRALITY PLAN
CALLS FOR KNOW
VAST EXPANSES
OF PUBLIC TRANSIT RIDERSHIP AND
SERVICE TO ACCOMMODATE THEM AS
WELL AS MANY OTHER THINGS THE
CITY&apos;S TRANSPORTATION MASTER
PLAN MAKES SIMILAR ASPIRATOR.
SO OUR LONG RANGE PLAN IS
REALLY SORT OF THE BLUEPRINT
FOR HOW WE&apos;RE GOING TO ACHIEVE
GOALS LIKE THAT AND THE
MARRIAGE PLAN THAT I&apos;M GOING TO
TALK TO TALK SPEAK ABOUT NOW IS
THE FIRST STEP OF IMPLEMENTING
THAT LONGER VISION.
AS YOU&apos;VE ALL SAID, PEOPLE ARE
WANTING TRANSFORMATIONAL
CHANGE.
THEY&apos;RE WILLING TO PAY BUT THEY
WANT IT TO BE CLEAR WHAT ARE WE
GETTING?
AND I KNOW THAT EVERYTHING YOU
JUST HEARD FROM EVOL PROBABLY
LIKE DRINKING FROM A FIREHOSE.
I&apos;M GOING TO TRY TO BREAK IT
DOWN INTO TEN CONCRETE
PROPOSALS FOR YOU THIS EVENING
AND ALL I CAN DO IS SCRATCH THE
SURFACE.
BUT WHAT I WILL DO NOW IS SHARE
MY SCREEN WITH LET ME KNOW IF
YOU CAN SEE THIS A THUMBS UP
MAYBE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO THIS IS THE DOCUMENT THAT WE
CIRCULATED TO YOU AND IS IN OUR
BOARD PACKET THIS WEEK.
THIS IS AN INITIAL PROPOSAL
FROM ME AND MY STAFF TO OUR
BOARD FOR THEIR CONSIDERATION
ABOUT A MILLAGE PROPOSAL.
OUR EXISTING MILLAGE IS
NATURALLY SUNSTAR MEETING SOON
AND IT WOULD BE TIME FOR US TO
BE PROPOSING A NEW ONE ANYWAY.
SO WHAT I&apos;LL DO IS I&apos;LL WALK
YOU THROUGH THIS VERY, VERY
QUICKLY MORE AS AN ORIENTATION
THAN A DETAILED INTRODUCTORY
COMMENTS UP FRONT REALLY I
THINK FOCUS ON THE WHY SOMEONE
SAID A FEW MOMENTS AGO THIS
PROPOSAL IS REALLY WORKING TO
MAINTAIN ALL OF THE SERVICES
THAT WE HAVE EXPAND THE
EVENING, LATE NIGHT WEEKEND AND
HOLIDAY SERVICES INTRODUCE AN
EXPRESS SERVICE BETWEEN
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR AND DOWNTOWN
YPSILANTI.
YOU MAY REMEMBER YOU&apos;VE JUST
MENTIONED THAT IN THE FIRST
STAGE I&apos;LL SAY THAT WE&apos;VE DONE
A REALLY GOOD JOB WITH FORREST
AND HIS TEAM OF MAKING THESE
TWO THINGS LINE UP.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S REALLY GOING TO BE
INCREASING SOCIAL EQUITY.
WE HAVE SOME DISPARATE AND SOME
DISPARATE THINGS GOING ON
ACROSS OUR SERVICE AREA BETWEEN
ANN ARBOR AND YPSILANTI.
WE WANT TO RESOLVE THEM,
HARMONIZE OUR SERVICES, BRING
EVERYONE UP TO THE SAME LEVEL,
INCREASE ACCESS TO JOBS,
HOUSING, MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
MANY OTHER TYPES
OF DESTINATIONS AND
OPPORTUNITIES.
IT&apos;S REALLY THE GAME WE&apos;RE IN
IS NOT TRANSPORTATION SO MUCH
AS IT IS ACCESS TO OPPORTUNITY
PROVIDED MOBILITY OPPORTUNITY
FOR EVERYONE IN THE COMMUNITY
BUT PARTICULARLY FOLKS LIKE
SENIORS, ANYONE WITH MOBILITY
LIMITATION, FOLKS WHO MAY BE
LOW INCOME BUT ALSO ANYONE WHO
WANTS TO JUST DITCH THEIR CAR.
SOME OF THESE THINGS LIKE BEING
ABLE TO TRAVEL LATE NIGHTS
OVERNIGHT ON THE WEEKEND REALLY
GEARED TOWARDS MAXIMIZING
INDEPENDENCE IN THAT REGARD,
INCREASING OUR CAPACITY TO
DELIVER MAJOR PROJECT
COMMISSIONER BOLAND ASKED A
MINUTE AGO IS THE IS THE
VILLAGE OPERATING OR CAPITAL?
AND THE ANSWER I&apos;M GOING TO
TELL YOU IN A MINUTE A LITTLE
BIT OF BOTH MOSTLY OPERATIONS
AND AS I SAID, A LOT
OF ALIGNMENT HERE WITH MANY
OTHER LOCAL PLANS.
&gt;&gt; I SHOULD MENTION JUST AS WE
GET GOING WE HAVE KIND OF TWO
MONTHS OF OUR BOARD TO DISCUSS
THIS.
WE&apos;LL BE DISCUSSING IT TOMORROW
EVENING.
I&apos;LL MAKE A LONGER PRESENTATION
ABOUT THIS AND I ENCOURAGE
EVERYONE WHO&apos;S INTERESTED TO
WATCH AND LEARN A BIT MORE AND
THEN WE&apos;LL DISCUSS IT AND THE
BOARD WILL DISCUSS IT AGAIN IN
APRIL BEFORE THEY MAKE A
DECISION.
SO MOVING FORWARD THE FIRST
ATTACHMENT REALLY GOES THROUGH
ALL THE PROPOSALS.
THERE ARE TEN SEPARATE PIECES
OF THIS PROPOSAL.
THEY&apos;RE THEY&apos;RE GROUPED INTO
TWO MAIN CATEGORIES MAINTAINING
OUR EXISTING SERVICES AND
EXPANSION ENHANCEMENT
OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE OUT
THERE.
THIS TABLE IN MANY WAYS IS THE
HEART OF A PROPOSAL FOR PAUSE
HERE.
IT&apos;S ATTEMPTING TO DO MANY
THINGS SO IT DOES BECOME A
COMPLICATED TABLE AND I
APOLOGIZE ESSENTIALLY YOU SEE
ON THIS SIDE THE THE SPECIFIC
PROPOSALS THAT ARE DESCRIBED IN
MORE DETAIL IN THE FOLLOWING
PAGES YOU SEE THE TOTAL COST
WHAT PERCENTAGE OF THE TOTAL
PACKAGE COST THAT IS THE
CORRESPONDING RATE.
I WILL SAY YOU CAN&apos;T YOU CAN&apos;T
CROSS-REFERENCE THESE TWO
NUMBERS BECAUSE BEARS AND AND
OTHER SUBSIDIES THAT WE&apos;RE
PUTTING INTO THE NET MILEAGE
CALCULATION YOU SEE A
CUMULATIVE MILRAY IT IS A
MILRAY PROPOSAL THAT IS LARGER
THAN OUR CURRENT POINT SEVEN
TWO POINT THREE EIGHT I THINK
THAT&apos;S A ONE POINT SIX EIGHT
MILLION INCREASE AS AS YOU&apos;VE
ALWAYS SAYING THERE ARE COSTS
TO HAVING EXPANDED TRANSIT.
WE WANT EVERYONE TO COMMUNITY
TO GO INTO THIS WITH OPEN EYES
AND THAT&apos;S SOMETHING FOR US AND
HIS CREW HAVE DONE VERY WELL I
THINK LAST FALL WHEN WE HAD OUR
FOUR SCENARIOS WE ALSO GAVE
ROUGHLY HERE&apos;S HOW MUCH IT&apos;S
GOING TO COST AND HERE&apos;S WHAT
IT WOULD MEAN IN TERMS
OF MILEAGE.
AND SO WE&apos;RE DOING THAT AGAIN
HERE JUST SO THAT THE COMMUNITY
CAN HAVE A TRANSPARENT AND OPEN
CONVERSATION ABOUT PRIORITIES
AND WHAT WE&apos;RE WILLING TO PAY
AND HOPEFULLY TO BE CLEAR ON
WHAT FOLKS ARE GETTING AND THEN
FINAL COLUMN IS IMPLEMENTATION
START DATE.
SO ALL THESE TWO CATEGORIES THE
FIRST ONE IS MAINTAINING
EXISTING SERVICES.
THE FIRST FOUR ITEMS HERE
RENEWAL ALLOWANCE FOR DEFICIT,
ALLOWANCE FOR INFLATION AND
ADDITIONAL STAFF ARE REALLY
ABOUT MAINTAINING WHAT WE HAVE
AND BEING ABLE TO MEET THE
COMMITMENTS AND EXPECTATIONS
OF THIS COMMUNITY TODAY MOLLY
ASKED ABOUT OR PERHAPS WAS IS
THAT ASKED ABOUT FARE
COLLECTION AND COULD WE DO MORE
FASTER?
&gt;&gt; SHORT ANSWER IS I NEED MORE
PEOPLE I HATE TO SAY IT IT&apos;S
IT&apos;S JUST ONE OF THOSE THINGS
WHERE EVERYTHING IS POSSIBLE
BUT HOW FAST AND SO TO BE ABLE
TO ADVANCE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT COMMUNITY HAS ASKED US TO
DO, WE&apos;RE ALREADY KIND OF MAXED
OUT.
&gt;&gt; SO SOME ADDITIONAL STAFF ARE
GOING TO BE NECESSARY FOR ALL
THAT FIRST CATEGORY IS REALLY
THERE JUST TO MAINTAIN THE
EXISTING SERVICES THAT WE HAVE.
THEN IN THE SECOND CATEGORY
ITEMS SIX THROUGH 10 THESE ARE
LIKE A SMORGASBORD.
THEIRS IS AN OPTIONAL GROUP
MENU OF ITEMS THAT ARE POSSIBLE
THAT PEOPLE COULD APPROVE, OUR
BOARD COULD APPROVE AND THERE&apos;S
A VARIETY THAT THAT COULD BE
IMPLEMENTED ALTOGETHER OR
INDIVIDUAL THE FIRST NUMBER
FIVE IS THAT EXPRESS ROUTE
BETWEEN THE TWO DOWNTOWNS.
WE THINK THIS IS A GREAT WAY TO
ACTUALLY CUT TRAVEL TIME BY
THIRD.
THAT DOESN&apos;T HAPPEN VERY OFTEN.
SO THIS IS A GREAT OPPORTUNITY
FOR LONGER HOURS OF OPERATION.
THAT MEANS GOING LATER INTO THE
EVENING SYSTEM WIDE ACROSS ALL
COMMUNITIES INCREASED FREQUENCY
OF WEEKEND SERVICE THIS REALLY
MATTERS FOR FOLKS WHO DON&apos;T
HAVE A CAR SENIORS, PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES, PERSONS WITH
LOW INCOME OR PEOPLE WITH THE
CAR WANT TO DITCH THEIR CAR
BECAUSE IT ENABLES A LEVEL
OF FREEDOM ON THE WEEKENDS THAT
YOU MAYBE YOU CAN MAKE THAT
SPONTANEOUS TRIP IF THE BUS IS
ONLY COMING EVERY 60 MINUTES
BUT IF IT&apos;S COMING EVERY HALF
AN HOUR THAT BECOMES MUCH MORE
POSSIBLE.
&gt;&gt; EXPANDED OVERNIGHT SERVICE
IN YPSILANTI AND YPSILANTI
TOWNSHIP.
ANN ARBOR HAS HAD OVERNIGHT
SERVICE FOR YEARS WITH OUR
SERVICE CALLED NITRITE.
BUT THAT SAME SERVICE IS NOT
AVAILABLE THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE
CITY OF YPSILANTI OR ALL
OF YPSILANTI TOWNSHIP.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S A BIT OF A PROBLEM
FOR US.
WE THINK THIS IS AN EQUITY
ISSUE THAT WE CAN RESOLVE HERE.
&gt;&gt; SIMILARLY ITEM NINE CUSTOMER
SERVICE AGENTS AT THE YPSILANTI
TRANSIT CENTER IF YOU VISIT OUR
BLAKE TRANSIT CENTER IN
DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR YOU WILL BE
GREETED BY FRIENDLY CUSTOMER
SERVICE AGENTS IN THE BUILDING
DURING MOST HOURS.
HAPPY TO SELL YOU A PASS.
ANSWER YOUR QUESTION.
TAKE YOUR PHOTO FOR A BUS PASS.
WE DON&apos;T HAVE ANY OF THAT AT
THE YPSILANTI TERMINAL.
WE HAVE THE SPACE.
WE HAVE THE COUNTER BUT WE
DON&apos;T HAVE ANY PEOPLE BEEN THAT
WAY FOR A VERY LONG TIME AND WE
DON&apos;T THINK THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
SO BEING ABLE TO STAFF THAT
FACILITY IS IMPORTANT AND THEN
FINALLY NUMBER TEN, THIS GETS
BACK TO JULIE&apos;S QUESTION ABOUT
MAJOR CAPITAL PROJECTS.
THIS IS A SET ASIDE TO HELP US
SAVE MONEY TO DO MAJOR
ADVANCEMENTS.
YES, THIS COULD INCLUDE FARE
COLLECTION EQUIPMENT BUT IT
COULD ALSO INCLUDE ZERO
EMISSIONS PLUS TECHNOLOGY BUS
RAPID TRANSIT, A NEW GARAGE
WIDE VARIETY OF FRANK A BIG
TRANSFORMATIVE PROJECTS THAT
HAVE VERY LARGE STICKER PRICES.
WE&apos;RE FORTUNATE IN THE UNITED
STATES AT THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT FREQUENTLY WILL HELP
CARRY 50 PERCENT OF OF THE COST
OF SUCH LARGE PROJECTS BUT BUS
RAPID TRANSIT TO PUT IT IN
PERSPECTIVE THAT EASILY COST
EIGHTY MILLION DOLLARS FOR THE
BRT ON WASHTENAW IF THE FEDS
PICK UP FORTY WE GOT TO COME UP
WITH THE OTHER FORTY.
SO THIS PROPOSAL IS ABOUT
CREATING A BIT OF A NEST EGG
OF CAPITAL MONEY THAT WE CAN
BANK UP OVER THE YEARS SO THAT
WE HAVE LOCAL MATCH TO BRING TO
THAT.
SO THE REST OF THIS SO TO
SUMMARIZE THIS TABLE BANKS UP
ALL THESE ELEMENTS GOES INTO
MORE DETAIL, TELLS YOU HOW TO
SUM UP AND BREAK DOWN THE FRONT
PAGES, GO INTO MORE DETAIL
ABOUT EACH ELEMENT OF IT.
I WON&apos;T GO THROUGH EACH ONE
FINAL PART OF THIS PROPOSAL IS
THE TIMING IS THE TIMING WE ARE
RECOMMENDING AUGUST MILLAGE IN
TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
THE REASON BEING THAT OUR
FUNDING WILL RUN OUT IN TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR TWENTY TWENTY THREE
IS THE LAST TIME WE CAN ASK THE
VOTERS AND THE LAWS WERE
ENACTED UNDER ONLY ALLOW US TO
SEEK REFERENDA ONCE EVERY
CALENDAR YEAR.
IT&apos;S QUITE SPECIFIC SO TWENTY
TWENTY TWO IS A GOOD YEAR BUT
IF WE SHOULD FAIL IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WE NEED A BACKUP AND
THAT WOULD BE TWENTY TWENTY
THREE.
THAT&apos;S THE DROP DEAD DATE TO BE
ABLE
TO RENEW THIS IF WE FAIL
BOTH OF THEM WE COULD HAVE
SERIOUS SERVICE DISRUPTIONS AS
EARLY AS TWENTY TWENTY FOUR SO
WITH THAT ONE MADAM CHAIR I
WILL STOP MY SCREEN HERE SO I
CAN SEE EVERYONE AND I&apos;M HAPPY
TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT
THIS SHORT TERM IMPLEMENTATION
OF A BIGGER LONG TERM VISION.
THANK YOU.
QUESTIONS COMMENTS I SEE
COMMISSIONER I THINK IT&apos;S THE
COMMISSIONER HALL AND THE
COMMISSIONER BUT GRANDMA SO I
GUESS ONE CONCERN I HAD WAS
THAT A LOT OF THE STUFF ISN&apos;T
VERY EXPLICIT AND YOU&apos;RE
PUSHING THROUGH WITH THIS BIG
MILLAGE INCREASE FOR AUGUST.
I MEAN I THINK SOME OF THE
STUFF MIGHT BE WORTH IT BUT
SOME OF IT&apos;S NOT VERY WELL
DEFINED LIKE SOME OF THE HOURS
MIGHT BE FIXED AND SOME MIGHT
BE FLEX RIGHT.
WELL, OK, YOU COULD IMPROVE
FLEX RIDE BUT GOING FROM A FOUR
HOUR WAIT TO A TWO HOUR WAIT
ISN&apos;T GOING TO DO MUCH FOR A
LOT OF PEOPLE.
AND I MEAN THAT&apos;S LIKE WHEN
I&apos;VE TRIED FLEX RIDE THE ROUTE
WE JUST INSANE.
AND THE OTHER THING IS YEAH, I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE TEXT BUT
I FEEL LIKE IT&apos;S CRUCIAL TO
HAVE MORE INFORMATION FOR
PASSING THIS AND THE OTHER
THING I THOUGHT IS IT&apos;S A
HOLIDAY SERVICE IN THE SUMMARY
BUT IN THE ACTUAL DESCRIPTION
IT DOES NOTHING ABOUT HOLIDAY
SERVICE AND YEAH SO THERE&apos;S
THAT AND THE OTHER CONCERN IS
GOING SO QUICKLY WITH THIS WITH
THIS OBVIOUS 20 22 I&apos;M
CONCERNED THAT YOU&apos;RE NOT GOING
TO HAVE TIME FOR FEEDBACK AND
DOING THIS BETTER TO FIND AND
AS FAR AS MAKING LIKE GETTING
THROUGH AND CONVINCING PEOPLE
THAT WE NEED THIS BIGGER
MILLAGE THAT I&apos;M WONDERING WHY
NOT LIKE AT LEAST PART TO
NOVEMBER OR MAYBE EVEN CONSIDER
DOING ONE MILLAGE FOR THE
RENEWAL AND ONE FOR THE
ADDITIONAL SERVICES MAYBE THOSE
BEING INSEPARATE YEARS?
WELL, THERE&apos;S A LOT THERE AND
IN TERMS OF SPLITTING INTO TWO
VILLAGES I THINK WE COULD
CONSIDER THAT THAT&apos;S CERTAINLY
AN OPTION OUR BOARD COULD DO IF
THEY SO CHOSE.
IT&apos;S NOT SOMETHING I&apos;M PREPARED
TO PROPOSE THOUGH.
UM, NOVEMBER I&apos;M EXPLICITLY
RECOMMENDING AUGUST BECAUSE THE
NOVEMBER RACE IS GOING TO BE
VERY DIFFICULT TO RUN IN.
WE HAVE GOVERNORS RACES CONTROL
OF THE US HOUSE UP FOR STAKE
AND POSSIBLY AS MANY AS 12
STATEWIDE BALLOT INITIATIVES
TARGETING FOR NOVEMBER.
THAT&apos;S GOING TO BE AN ENORMOUS
BALLOT.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S GOING TO BE VERY
LOUD ACRIMONIOUS.
IT&apos;S GOING TO BE VERY DIFFICULT
TO REACH AND EDUCATE VOTERS
UNDER THOSE CIRCUMSTANCE.
PEOPLE WITH A WHOLE LOT MORE
MONEY WILL BE BUYING OUT ALL
THE FACEBOOK AND WE WILL NOT BE
ABLE TO TO HELP PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND WHAT&apos;S IN OUR
PROPOSAL UNDER THOSE
CIRCUMSTANCES.
SO WE THINK AUGUST IS PROBABLY
A BETTER TIME.
THANK FOR THE FEEDBACK ABOUT
THE HOLIDAYS THING BEING
MISSING THAT GIVES ME SOMETHING
TO DOUBLE CHECK ON THIS AND
WITH RESPECT TO HOW THE HOURS
OF SERVICE ARE DONE AND LATE
NIGHTS I&apos;LL ASK FORREST IF HE
WANTS TO WEIGH IN ON THIS.
I THINK IT DOES HAVE SOME SOME
PLANNING WORK THAT NEEDS TO BE
DONE THAT WOULD OBVIOUSLY
INVOLVE THE COMMUNITY TO HELP
US DECIDE WHETHER IT&apos;S
EXPANDING THE FIXED ROUTE
SERVICE HOURS OR LEANING MORE
ON FLEX DRIVE.
BUT FIRST, DO YOU WANT TO WEIGH
IN ON THAT CHOICE FOR WELL, AS
MATT MENTIONED, THOSE DETAILS
NEED TO BE GOING STRONG.
A PUBLIC CONSULTATION PROCESS
OF COURSE INVOLVED A LOT MORE
DETAILED ANALYSIS COMPARISON AT
THIS MOMENT.
WE YOU KNOW THE MESSAGE WE WANT
TO JUST EXPAND AND MAKING SURE
THE LONGER SERVICE HOURS FOR
THOSE WHO NEED IT HOW WE
DELIVER THAT COULD BE THROUGH
FIXER&apos;S OR FLECK&apos;S RIGHT OR
MIXED UP PICTURE IS IN FLUX
RIGHT.
SO YOU KNOW, AS I MENTIONED, WE
CAN GO OUT ASK PROPOSED OPTIONS
FOR PUBLIC FEEDBACK AND THEN WE
CAN MAKE A DECISION AFTER THAT
.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I KIND OF GET THAT
THOUGH.
IS THAT GOING TO TAKE PLACE
BEFORE THE MILITARY IS ON THE
BALLOT OR AFTER BECAUSE I FEEL
LIKE IT&apos;S CRITICAL TO HAVE THIS
ALL DEFINED BEFORE PEOPLE VOTE
BECAUSE IF YOU&apos;RE JUST WANTING
A BLANK CHECK I THINK IT&apos;S MORE
LIKELY PEOPLE ARE GOING TO VOTE
NO AND I FEEL LIKE THAT LIKE
THE PRESSURE TO GET OUT BY
AUGUST MIGHT BE AN ARGUMENT
TOWARDS THE TWO MIRAJ APPROACH
THAT RENU IN AUGUST AND THEN DO
THE EXPANSION IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AFTER YOU HAVE MORE TIME
TO DEFINE WHAT THEIR THANK YOU.
WE&apos;LL TAKE THAT UNDER
CONSIDERATION.
ANOTHER OPTION I COULD SUGGEST
TO THE BOARD THAT ONE IS TOO
ILL DEFINED.
WE COULD SIMPLY ELIMINATE THAT
OPTION ENTIRELY FROM THIS
VILLAGE AND FORWARD WITHOUT IT
.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT.
I&apos;LL DEFINITELY CONVEY THAT
OVER TO OUR BOARD.
&gt;&gt; I WILL SAY I DON&apos;T LIKE THE
IDEA OF ELIMINATING THIS STUFF
ENTIRELY.
I THINK THE NIGHT AND WEEKEND
SERVICE IS DEFINITELY CRITICAL
AS SOMEONE WHO DOES NOT DRIVE
AND I WAS FREQUENTLY YEAH.
LIKE OH YEAH HOURLY SERVICE AND
THERE&apos;S JUST IT REALLY DOES NOT
WORK WELL AND SERVICE ENDING AT
SIX P.M. ON SUNDAYS THEN ALONG
COMPLETING THE HOLIDAYS HAVING
ABSOLUTELY NO SERVICE JUST
EXCEPT FOR FLEX RIDE WHICH IS
FREQUENTLY THE WAY IT IS
FREQUENTLY MEASURED IN HOURS
AND JUST YEAH I JUST WOULD LIKE
TO SEE THIS BUT I ALSO DON&apos;T
WANT THE MILEAGE TO FAIL AND I
FEEL COMING UP WITH A TRIPLING
OF THE MILEAGE WITH ILL DEFINED
PRIORITIES IS I FEAR IS GOING
TO CAUSE IT TO FAIL.
THANK YOU.
I&apos;M GOING TO KEEP MOVING AS
LONG AS I KNOW WE STARTED LATE
BUT I WANT TO TRY AND GET US
KEEP US MOVING.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER VALDERRAMA, I
WANTED TO LEARN A BIT MORE ON
LIKE WHAT TYPE OF SHELTER IT&apos;S
LIKE MOVING FORWARD WHAT
FUNDING IS LOOKING LIKE JUST
BECAUSE THERE&apos;S BEEN SOME
INSTANCES WHERE LIKE WAITING
FOR THE BUS AND LIKE RAIN OR
EVEN WHEN IT&apos;S LIKE TOO HOT OR
ANY SNOW CAN BE A BARRIER
ENOUGH FOR PEOPLE TO EVEN USE
THESE SERVICES.
I&apos;M WONDERING WHAT THAT WILL
LOOK LIKE FOR THE NEXT FIVE
YEARS FOR BEING ABLE TO BUILD
SO SO A SHELTER IS A CAPITAL
EXPENSE.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S A SINGLE LUMP
INVESTMENT.
I HAVEN&apos;T CHECKED RECENTLY BUT
I THINK EACH SHELTER CAN COST
ANYWHERE LIKE TEN THOUSAND JUST
TO PUT THAT IN PERSPECTIVE SO
BEING ABLE TO THE TENTH ITEM ON
HERE BUILDING UP A CAPITAL
RESERVE SOME OF THAT COULD
ABSOLUTELY BE USED OR SHELTERS.
&gt;&gt; WE DON&apos;T HAVE A PARTICULAR
PLAN OR PRIORITY FOR IT HERE
BUT IT IS A CAPITAL FUNDING
LIMITATION.
WE FREQUENTLY GET REQUESTS FOR
SHELTERS AND WE TRY TO
ACCOMMODATE AS MANY AS WE CAN.
THEY&apos;RE GENERALLY ALLOCATED TO
TO BE BLUNT THE FREE THE
BUSIEST STOPS PLACES ARE THE
MOST PEOPLE ARE WAITING MOST
OF THE TIME WE PROBABLY
COULDN&apos;T AFFORD TO PUT A
SHELTER AT EVERY BUS STOP
ESPECIALLY IT&apos;S ONLY USED ONCE
A DAY.
SO WE HAVE A DISTINCT PLAN IN
THE VILLAGE BUT THAT IS
DEFINITELY ONE AREA WHERE WE
COULD USE THOSE CAPITAL.
&gt;&gt; HOW POSSIBLE IS IT TO
EXPLICITLY DEFINE GOALS FOR A
NUMBER OF SHELTERS BECAUSE I
I&apos;M A SEMI FREQUENT BUS RIDER
AND I HAVE YET TO ACTUALLY USE
A SHELTER TOO.
AND SO I&apos;M WONDERING WHERE WHAT
KIND OF LIKE THRESHOLD OUR
INTERNAL GOALS THAT THERE ARE
BEING SET IN ORDER TO BUILD
MORE SHELTERS BEYOND HAVING
PEOPLE FOLLOW UP WITH LIKE
EMAILS OR PHONE CALLS TO
EXPRESS INTEREST IN IT.
WE HAVE A LONGSTANDING POLICY
WITH A UTILIZATION THRESHOLD.
WE WE COUNT THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE WHO GET ON FOR
EXAMPLE AT EVERY BUS STOP YOU
DON&apos;T COUNT PEOPLE OUT BECAUSE
WHEN THEY GET OFF THEY DON&apos;T
HANG OUT AT THE SHELTER RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THEY WALK AWAY.
WE&apos;D BE HAPPIER TAKE ANY
SPECIFIC SUGGESTION FOR A
PARTICULAR BUS STOP THAT ANYONE
THINKS MAYBE SHOULD BE
CONSIDERED ON OCCASION WE WILL
MAKE AN EXCEPTION FOR A LOW USE
BUS STOP IF IT&apos;S NEAR A SENIORS
HOME FOR EXAMPLE, OR A SPECIAL
DESTINATION OF PARTICULAR NEEDS
THAT MAY WANT TO SHELTER.
WE DO HAVE THE CAPACITY TO MAKE
SOME EXCEPTIONS BUT RELATIVELY
SPEAKING IT&apos;S IT&apos;S IT&apos;S A IT&apos;S
NOT SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;VE BUILT
INTO THIS VILLAGE PROPOSAL AT
THIS TIME BUT IT&apos;S SOMETHING WE
COULD CERTAINLY CONSIDER.
I&apos;D LOVE TO SEE IT AT LEAST IN
THE LONG RANGE PLANNING IF NOT
IN THE SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE
PROPOSAL.
I THINK IT&apos;S I DO THINK IT&apos;S A
REAL DEFICIT IN OUR SYSTEM ALSO
A LACK OF SEATING.
IT&apos;S A BIG ACCESSIBILITY ISSUE
.
SO THANK YOU FOR BRINGING THAT
UP AND THAT&apos;S THE OTHER HAND.
&gt;&gt; SO I JUST HAVE ONE OK, I&apos;M
GOING TO HAVE A QUESTION AND
THEN WE&apos;LL SEE HOW WE ARE ON
TIME WHICH IS I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT
YOUR PLAN TO AVOID THE SORT
OF BETTER TRANSIT NOW CAMPAIGN
.
IT&apos;S ACTUALLY AN ANTIMILITARY
CAMPAIGN.
WE HAVE A HISTORY IN ANN ARBOR
OF SOME PRETTY TOUGH RESISTANCE
TO MILEAGES AND SOME SUCCESSFUL
RESISTANCE TO VILLAGES AND
SPECIFICALLY AROUND TRANSIT
VILLAGES.
AND SO I THIS IS A REALLY
AMBITIOUS AND I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT
HOW YOU PLAN TO ACTUALLY GET IT
THROUGH THE
DIVERTERS.
&gt;&gt; SO IN TWENTY FOURTEEN WE
WENT FOR THE FIRST VILLAGE AND
THERE WAS OPPOSITION TO THAT
VILLAGE WE WON SEVENTY ONE
PERCENT THAT WAS THE FIRST
INCREASE IN TWENTY EIGHTEEN.
WE HAD OUR SECOND VILLAGE THAT
WAS A STRAIGHT RENEWAL.
WE WON EIGHTY THREE PERCENT
EVERY PRECINCT IN ALL THREE
JURISDICTIONS SOMETIMES
OVERWHELMING AMOUNT SO WE HAVE
I THINK A GOOD REASON TO LOSE A
FAIR AMOUNT OF SUPPORT IN THE
COMMUNITY BUT YOU CAN&apos;T TAKE
THAT FOR GRANTED AND YOU&apos;RE
ABSOLUTELY RIGHT THAT TAXES AND
TAX INCREASES ARE CONTROVERSIAL
AND THE COMMUNITY NEEDS TO HAVE
A QUESTION OR EXCUSE ME A
DISCUSSION ABOUT PRIORITIES AND
TO BE DIRECT ABOUT IT.
IT&apos;S KIND OF EASY WHEN WE&apos;RE
MAKING A PLAN LIKE THE LONG
RANGE PLAN FOR EVERYONE TO SAY
I WANT EVERYTHING.
&gt;&gt; GIVE ME THE MOST EXPENSIVE
VERSION OF WHATEVER YOURSELF
WHEN YOU ACTUALLY SHOW UP WITH
THE BILL THINGS KIND OF GET
REAL FAST RIGHT.
SO PART OF THE HOW WE HAVE
STRUCTURED THIS PROPOSAL IS TO
ACCOUNT FOR AND BE FLEXIBLE TO
WHAT WE HEAR FROM THE COMMUNITY
OVER THE NEXT SEVERAL WEEKS THE
WAY THE PROPOSAL IS STRUCTURED
WITH TEN DIFFERENT PIECES,
PARTICULARLY THE SERVICE
ENHANCEMENT OPTIONS, THOSE
OPTIONS CAN BE APPROVED ALL
TOGETHER OR INDIVIDUAL ONES CAN
BE REMOVED IF THE BOARD HEARS A
LOT OF FEEDBACK FROM EVERYBODY
THAT SAYS WE LOVE TRANSIT BUT
MAYBE NOT THAT MUCH THEY CAN
BEGIN TO LOOK HARD AT SOME
OF THOSE AND SEE WHICH ONES
MAYBE DON&apos;T MAKE THE CUT.
THAT&apos;S PERFECTLY ACCEPTABLE.
I&apos;VE BEEN QUITE CLEAR WITH THE
BOARD THAT THIS IS A PROPOSAL
TO GET THE BALL ROLLING AND
IT&apos;S ULTIMATELY UP TO THEM TO
MAKE THAT KIND OF ALSO A
POLITICAL DECISION AND WEIGHING
THE WILL OF THE VOTERS
BEFOREHAND I THINK IS AN
IMPORTANT PART OF THAT.
THE OTHER PART OF IT IS THE
STRUCTURE OF HOW THIS
DISCUSSION IS HAPPENING OVER
THE NEXT MONTH.
WE&apos;VE INTRODUCED IT THIS WEEK
AND YES, I AGREE IT IS MOVING
QUICKLY.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE SOME REASONS FOR
THAT.
&gt;&gt; BUT WE HAVE TOMORROW NIGHT
WHAT WILL WE BE MAKING MORE
FULSOME PROPOSAL PRESENTATION
AND THEN INTO APRIL SO WE CAN
TAKE COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK
TONIGHT?
IT&apos;S JUST THE FIRST WE HAVE
NUMEROUS PRESENTATIONS
SCHEDULED THROUGHOUT OUR THREE
COMMUNITIES.
&gt;&gt; WE CAN TAKE COMMENTS ON THE
VILLAGE PROPOSAL BY PHONE, BY
EMAIL VERBALLY.
I&apos;M STRONGLY ENCOURAGING PEOPLE
TO COME TO OUR BOARD MEETING
TOMORROW NIGHT AND IT&apos;S ONE
THING TO SAY TO ME I&apos;M JUST A
STAFF PERSON.
I WRITE THE PROPOSAL.
IT&apos;S THE BOARD THAT HAS TO MAKE
THE HARD DECISIONS FROM THIS
POINT ON.
SO IF PEOPLE FEEL STRONGLY
EITHER IN FAVOR OF TRANSIT OR
ELEMENTS OF THIS PROPOSAL OR
THAT NOW IS MAYBE NOT THE BEST
TIME FOR TAX INCREASES, I
STRONGLY ENCOURAGE EVERYONE TO
TO COME TO OUR BOARD MEETING ON
MARCH THE 13TH SEVENTEENTH
EXCUSE ME TOMORROW NIGHT AND IN
APRIL TWENTY FIRST AND EXPRESS
YOUR FEELINGS DIRECTLY TO THE
BOARD.
I THINK THAT&apos;S HOW WE CAN
RIGHTSIZE THIS IF YOU WILL AS A
BALLOT INITIATIVE AND HOPEFULLY
PRESENT SOMETHING TO THE VOTERS
THAT THEY THAT THEY DO WANT TO
APPROVE.
ULTIMATELY THIS ENTIRE EXERCISE
FROM THE LONG RANGE PLAN DOWN
TO THIS FIRST IMPLEMENTATION
STEP HAS TO GO TO THE VOTERS
AND THEY HAVE TO APPROVE IT SO
IT WILL BE THEM THAT ULTIMATELY
DECIDES WHETHER OR NOT THEY
WANT THIS VISION TO COME TRUE
AND THAT WHAT TIME IS THAT
MEETING TOMORROW OUR MEETING
OUR BOARD MEETING START AT SIX
THIRTY PM THERE ARE HYBRID YOU
ARE WELCOME IN PERSON BUT YOU
ARE ALSO WELCOME.
VIRTUALLY ALL THE INFORMATION
IS ON OUR WEBSITE TO JOIN
VIRTUALLY WE STRONGLY WE&apos;RE IN
THE DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR LIBRARY
AND WE ARE OPEN BUT I WOULD
ENCOURAGE VIRTUAL PARTICIPATION
EVERYTHING WILL LOOK LIKE THIS.
&gt;&gt; AWESOME.
ALL RIGHT, THANKS SO MUCH.
I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE US ALONG AT
THIS POINT.
I REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR TIME.
THE TIME OF THE OTHER STAFF AND
CONSULTANTS.
THIS HAS BEEN REALLY
INTERESTING.
SO THANK YOU.
AND I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE ON TO
STAFF REPORT AND UPDATES AND
RECOMMEND WE HAD PLANNED FOR A
LONGER CHUNK OF TIME FOR THIS
BUT I WONDER IF WE CAN PERHAPS
DO THE SHORT VERSION.
&gt;&gt; YES, I&apos;M SURE I CAN GET
THROUGH IT VERY QUICKLY.
SO THE MONTHLY UPDATES THAT&apos;S
INCLUDED IN YOUR PACKET FROM
STAFF IS RELATIVELY SHORT.
IT&apos;S ONLY TWO PAGES WE&apos;RE KIND
OF IN THE DOLDRUMS RIGHT NOW
FROM WHEN WE IDENTIFIED
PROJECTS LAST LIST WAS LONG BUT
THINGS HAVEN&apos;T STARTED YET SO
REALLY THERE&apos;S THE UPDATES
REALLY JUST INCLUDE INFORMATION
ABOUT PROJECT WEBSITE.
SO ON THE STREET RESURFACING
PROJECT YOU HEARD FROM BIG
DIAMOND TODAY THAT WEBSITE BEEN
ESTABLISHED S MAIN SAME SORT
OF THING.
THERE&apos;S A SURVEY THAT&apos;S OPEN ON
A PROJECT WEBSITE THAT&apos;S BEEN
CREATED E MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
BRIDGE.
THE UPDATE HERE IS THAT THERE
IS COST ESTIMATE FOR AN EAST
PATHWAY UNDER THE E MEDICAL
DRIVE BRIDGE THAT&apos;S BEING
WORKED ON RIGHT NOW.
LOWERTOWN STUDY IS COMPLETE.
THE FULL REPORT IS INCLUDED IN
THE PACKET OF THE SPEAKER
ADDRESS THAT THIS EVENING SOME
UPDATES ON STREETLIGHT NUMBERS
TRAFFIC CALMING BOTH NORTH SIDE
AND LONGMONT FAIRVIEW WERE
APPROVED BY COUNCIL SO THOSE
ARE GOING TO GO INTO
CONSTRUCTION DURING THE
CONSTRUCTION SEASON OF THE
SUMMER AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN
FUNDING RECOMMENDATION AGAIN
THE MEMO THAT WAS SHARED WITH
COUNCIL WAS SHARED WITH YOU AND
YOUR PACKET AS WELL.
BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS COUNCIL
IS EXPECTED TO DELIBERATE ON
HOW TO ALLOCATE THOSE FUNDS IN
APRIL NOT THE NEXT MEETING BUT
THE MEETING EITHER THE FIRST OR
SECOND MEETING IN APRIL AND
THEN THE LAST UPDATE IS THE
TWENTY TWENTY TWO BITMAP IS NOW
AVAILABLE ONLINE.
IT&apos;S NOT OUT OF PRINT YET BUT A
PDF VERSION IS AVAILABLE ONLINE
AND WE COORDINATE WITH THE
COUNTY ON DIVIDING UP THE
PRINTING COSTS SO WE ARE
WORKING WITH THEM RIGHT NOW AND
HOW MANY THEY NEED AND HOW MANY
WE NEED BUT HOPEFULLY THOSE
WILL GET SENT TO THE PRINTER
HERE SOON.
I JUST WANT TO HIGHLIGHT A
COUPLE OF THE OTHER ADDITIONS
THAT WERE INCLUDED IN THE
PACKET I ALREADY MENTIONED SOME
OF THESE THE AMERICAN RESCUE
PLAN ACT FUNDING.
THIS IS THE STAFF SUGGESTION IN
TERMS OF HOW THE TWENTY FOUR
MILLION DOLLARS SHOULD BE
ALLOCATED.
I WOULD DRAW YOUR ATTENTION TO
PAGE EIGHT OF THE MEMO.
IT GIVES KIND OF THE BREAKDOWN
OF THE RECOMMENDATION
OF FUNDING FROM THIS
COMMISSION&apos;S PERSPECTIVE.
THERE IS TWO MILLION DOLLARS
IDENTIFIED FOR VISION ZERO PLAN
IMPLEMENTATION.
SO IF COUNCIL AGREES WITH WHAT
THE SUGGESTION IS, THIS WILL BE
A NICE SHOT IN THE ARM FOR
VISION ZERO WE HAVE WHAT I LIKE
TO CALL SEED MONEY FOR THIS
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR BUT THERE
ISN&apos;T DEDICATED FUNDING MOVING
FORWARD SO THIS COULD GIVE US A
COUPLE OF YEARS WORTH
OF FUNDING TO KIND OF KEEP THE
MOMENTUM GOING TOWARDS VISION
ZERO PROJECTS LOWERTOWN STUDY
AGAIN IT&apos;S A IT&apos;S A PRETTY
HEFTY DOCUMENT.
IT&apos;S A FOUR PAGES.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF TECHNICAL
MATERIAL IN YOU RECEIVED A
REPORT ON IT LATE LAST YEAR AND
SO WE WENT BACK TO THE
CONSULTANT AND KIND
OF FINALIZED THE DOCUMENT AND
IT&apos;S NOW READY WE WILL BE
SHARING THAT WITH CITY COUNCIL
AS WELL AND IS POSTED TO THE
WEBSITE AND THEN THE LAST ONE
IS A COMMUNICATION FROM THE
CITY TO THE FEDERAL
ADMINISTRATION RELATED TO THE
ENTIRE STATION.
AGAIN, YOU HEARD A CALLER SPEAK
TO THAT AS WELL.
YOU KNOW, I DON&apos;T HAVE ANY
UPDATES BEYOND WHAT&apos;S ALREADY
IN THIS LETTER.
WE&apos;RE STILL IN DISCUSSIONS WITH
OUR ADMINISTRATION ABOUT HOW TO
MOVE THE PROJECT FORWARD AND
WILL BE SURE TO CIRCLE BACK
WITH YOU.
BUT WE FULLY ANTICIPATE THERE&apos;S
GOING TO BE SOME PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT ON THIS PROJECT
SOMETIME THIS YEAR.
SO ONCE WE GET SOME DIRECTION
IN TERMS OF WHAT WE SHOULD BE
ASKING, WE&apos;LL BE SURE TO LOOP
YOU IN ON THAT AS WELL THEN
HAVE IT IN AND ANY QUESTIONS
YOU MIGHT HAVE.
THANK YOU.
THAT WAS VERY FAST.
COMMISSIONER ROBERT, I DO HAVE
A QUESTION.
I WAS LOOKING THROUGH THE
LOWERTOWN REPORT AND THEY
REFERRED TO SOME APPENDICES
THAT I DON&apos;T THINK ARE ATTACHED
CURRENTLY.
AM I WRONG ABOUT THAT?
&gt;&gt; NO, YOU&apos;RE RIGHT.
WHAT WE WILL DO IS WE&apos;LL MAKE
SURE ALL THE APPENDICES ARE
INCLUDED ON THE WEBSITE BUT IT
JUST BECOMES SO UNWIELDY IT
PROBABLY BECOMES LIKE A
THOUSAND PAGE DOCUMENT.
IT&apos;S A LONG DOCUMENT.
YEAH.
OK, THANKS.
&gt;&gt; MY RECOLLECTION IS THAT
THERE WERE SOME CONSIDERATIONS
AROUND A CAMERA IF IT WAS BIKE
LANES OR SIDEWALKS OR SOME KIND
OF RECONFIGURATIONS THAT WERE
SORT OF WAITING ON THE
LOWERTOWN FINAL REPORT TO COME
OUT AND I&apos;M WONDERING ARE IS
THAT GOING TO START MOVING
RIGHT AWAY OR IS THERE
SOMETHING THAT HAS TO HAPPEN?
YEAH.
NOW THAT THE STUDY IS FINALIZED
AND IT WAS JUST FINALIZED LAST
WE NEED TO CIRCLE BACK WITH AND
NICK AND HELP ME REMEMBER THIS
I THINK IT WAS ON BARTON THERE
WAS A DISCUSSION ABOUT REMOVAL
OF ON-STREET PARKING AND THE
CONSIDERATION OF POSSIBLE
INCLUSION BIKE LANES.
SO NOW THE REPORT IS DONE.
WE&apos;LL CIRCLE BACK WITH THE
PROJECT MANAGER ON THE PROJECT
ON BARTON AND SEE IF THERE&apos;S A
TIMELINE TO BE ABLE TO
INCORPORATE THE RECOMMENDATIONS
FROM THE PLAN AND CARRY THOSE
FORWARD IN ORDER TO DO LIST.
ADMITTEDLY WE HAVEN&apos;T CIRCLED
THE WAGONS YET ON THAT ISSUE
YET.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHERE I THINK ANY
OTHER QUESTIONS ARE GOING TO
KEEP US MOVING.
THANK YOU FOR THAT REPORT NEXT
WE&apos;RE MOVING ON TO LIAISON
REPORT SO ANY COMMISSIONERS WHO
SERVE AS LIAISONS TO ANOTHER
BODY OR ORGANIZATION ARE
INVITED TO PROVIDE BRIEF
REPORTS
AND UPDATES
REPRESENTING THE SURE THAT
DISABILITY ISSUES THEY HAVE A
LITTLE TROUBLE FINDING SOMEONE
KNEW I WAS GOING TO BE LEAVING
THAT COMMISSION IN MAY AND
YEAH.
SO HOPING WE CAN GET A NEW
MEMBER BUT I&apos;M STILL HERE FOR
NOW AND ANYWAY JUST WE HAD A
PRESENTATION BY A COMPANY
CALLED MOVE MOVIE THAT&apos;S KIND
OF DOING KIND OF TRANS RELATED
APP THAT&apos;S MORE OF AN ON DEMAND
SERVICE THAT SEEMS TO BE
TARGETING RURAL AREAS AND I
KNOW THEY&apos;RE LAUNCHING IN
WASHTENAW COUNTY WITH SOME KIND
OF PARTNERSHIP WITH THE WAVE
AND THEY DIDN&apos;T NECESSARILY
HAVE ANY DETAILS AS TO WHERE
THEY&apos;RE OFFERING THE SERVICE.
IT SOUNDS LIKE IT&apos;S MORE
ORIENTED TOWARDS CHELSEA AND
DEXTER AREAS BUT I AM KIND
OF INTRIGUED THAT THERE&apos;S A NEW
ON DEMAND TYPE SERVICE THAT&apos;S
ORIENTED TOWARDS THESE RURAL
AREAS BECAUSE THOSE ARE THE
AREAS WHERE IT&apos;S REALLY HARD TO
GET TRANSIT AND IT&apos;S ALSO
REALLY HARD TO GET UBER, LYFT
AND MY PARENTS ACTUALLY LIVE IN
SUCH AN AREA IN WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND COUNTRY.
I AM CURIOUS TO SEE WHAT COMES
OF THIS MOVING PARTNERSHIP WITH
WAVE AND IF THEY EXPAND OUT
FURTHER AND OTHER AREAS AND
YEAH SO I JUST THOUGHT THAT
MIGHT BE OF SOMEWHAT
OF INTEREST TO YOU JUST SEEING
THIS PRESENTATION AND I GUESS
THAT&apos;S I&apos;VE GOT TO SAY I
DEFINITELY THINK I SAW LIKE AS
FAR AS THE ALTERNATE I&apos;M I AM
CURIOUS DOES THAT HAVE TO GO TO
CITY COUNCIL TO OUR BYLAW
AMENDMENTS OR IS THAT PASSED
ONCE WE PASS IT BECAUSE I&apos;M
KIND OF CURIOUS AS PART OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WHEN
THEY CAN APPOINT ALTERNATE AND
YEAH, MY UNDERSTANDING I THINK
I READ IN THE BYLAWS THE
ENABLING LEGISLATION IT IS
ACTUALLY YOU HAVE TO GO TO CITY
COUNCIL BUT THE SELECTION
OF ALTERNATES IS A FUNCTION
THAT&apos;S BETWEEN YOU KNOW, THE
COMMISSION ON DISABILITY ISSUES
AND WHATEVER FOR THEM THAT THAT
THOSE WON&apos;T HAVE TO GO BACK.
&gt;&gt; SO WHAT IS THE PROCESS?
I THINK ONE DAY WHEN THE BYLAW
WOULD TAKE EFFECT YEAH.
&gt;&gt; ADMITTEDLY WILL UPLOAD IT
NOW THAT YOU&apos;VE TAKEN ACTION ON
IT, WE&apos;LL UPLOAD IT FOR
COUNCIL&apos;S CONSIDERATION BUT
ADMITTEDLY THOSE ARE FIVE BY
WEEKLY TIME FOR ANYTHING WE
UPLOAD CITY COUNCIL SO PROBABLY
THE EARLIEST WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
IS IF I&apos;M LUCKY I CAN GET AT
THE SECOND MEETING IN APRIL BUT
MORE LIKELY THE FIRST MEETING
IN MAY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
THANK YOU.
I&apos;LL MAKE THIS PRETTY BRIEF.
THE PLANNING COMMISSION MET FOR
THE WORKING SESSION ON MARCH
8TH TO TALK ABOUT PARKING
MAXIMUMS.
I THINK THAT IN THE BEGINNING
OF APRIL WE&apos;LL SEE THE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION TRASK&apos;S
COME FORWARD.
SO I THINK THAT&apos;LL BE APRIL 5TH
ON THE DISCUSSION IS
PREDOMINANTLY ABOUT ELIMINATING
MINIMUMS AND I DON&apos;T THINK
THERE&apos;S ANY REAL CONTROVERSY
ABOUT THAT.
WE HAD SOME DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
MAXIMUMS AND WE HAD SOME PUT UP
FOR THREE SPOTS FOR THOUSAND
AND AND I DID THERE WAS A GOOD
HEALTHY DISCUSSION AROUND THAT
PARTICULAR TOPIC ABOUT WHAT&apos;S
URBAN SUBURBAN YOU KIND OF KNOW
OF THAT HAS TO DO WITH PARKING
.
JUST WANTED TO SAY IF YOU GUYS
WANT TO PAY ATTENTION TO
PARKING THAT&apos;S COMING FOR THE
FIRST WEEK OF APRIL.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
COMMISSIONER ROELAND TELEVISION
ZERO REPORTER DO YOU FEEL LIKE
WE ALREADY COVERED IS THERE
ANYTHING FROM THE MEETING
ITSELF THAT YOU WANTED TO SHARE
OR WAS IT MOSTLY GETTING
STARTED?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I WILL SAY THAT THERE
ARE THESE TWO COMPONENTS TO SO
THERE&apos;S THE QUICK BUILD AND
THEN THERE&apos;S THE MAJOR STREETS
TRAFFIC CALMING AND THE PLAN IS
TO IMPLEMENT QUITE A FEW
DIFFERENT CRYPTO DESIGNS BEFORE
JULY 1ST.
AND SO THAT&apos;S REALLY MOVING
FAST.
AT THE MEETING WE WERE
PRESENTED WITH KIND IDEAS FOR
WHAT WAS GOING TO HAPPEN.
IT WAS VERY DATA DRIVEN BASED
ON WHERE CRASHES THAT HAPPENED
AND BUT WITH THE MAJOR TRAFFIC
COMING, THE PLAN IS JUST TO
BUILD A SORT OF TOOLBOX THAT
CAN BE USED LATER ON SO SO
THERE WON&apos;T BE ANY
IMPLEMENTATION OF MAJOR TRAFFIC
AND I GUESS THERE&apos;S NO MONEY
FOR IT RIGHT NOW.
BUT THAT&apos;S WHERE THINGS ARE.
YEAH, I GUESS THAT&apos;S ALL SAY
JUMP IN IF HE HAS SOMETHING
MORE TO ADD.
THAT&apos;S A GOOD SUMMARY I THINK I
THINK AND IF I IF I MAY JUST
ADD ONE THING COMMISSIONERS&apos;
MAY BE INTERESTED IN THOSE
SPECIFIC PROJECTS.
SO IF YOU GO TO THE VISION
THEIR WEBSITE WHICH IS A BROAD
FLASH VISION YOU CAN CLICK ON A
PRESENTATION AND I THINK IT&apos;S
AROUND LIKE THIRTY OR SO I
THINK I MENTIONED THIS IN THE
HOMEWORK.
I JUST WANT TO SCAN THROUGH
THOSE SO YOU CAN GET
APPRECIATION OF THE LOCATIONS
AND WHAT SOME OF THE TREATMENTS
ARE THAT ARE BEING PROPOSED.
IF WE HAD TIME OFF WE WOULD
HAVE GONE INTO MORE DETAIL
TODAY BUT WE RAN OUT OF TIME.
&gt;&gt; SO MY APOLOGIES MAYBE NEXT
TIME.
THANK YOU.
I THINK THAT&apos;S ALL OF OUR
LIAISONS.
SO NOW IT&apos;S TIME FOR COMMISSION
MEMBER COMMUNICATION.
SO ALL COMMISSIONERS ARE
INVITED TO PROVIDE REPORTS AND
UPDATES.
I JUST WANTED TO LET YOU ALL
KNOW THAT I COMMUNICATED WITH
THE RAYMOND AND MOLLY AND NEXT
MONTH&apos;S COMMISSION MEETING WILL
BE MY LAST MEETING SINCE I WILL
BE COMPLETING MY PROGRAM.
I&apos;LL STILL BE IN ANN ARBOR BUT
I ALSO WANT TO JUST MAKE SURE
AND BE TRANSPARENT ON MY
AVAILABILITY AND I&apos;LL BE
TRAVELING A LOT.
THEN SHORTLY AFTER GRADUATE.
BUT I WANTED TO LET YOU ALL
KNOW THAT I&apos;LL BE JOINING YOU
ALL FOR APRIL AND THEN HAPPY TO
HOPEFULLY RUN INTO EACH OF YOU
AT SOME POINT IN AN HOUR OVER
THE SUMMER SINCE MOST OF OUR
INTERACTIONS HAVE BEEN VIRTUAL.
BUT IT&apos;S BEEN VERY NEAT AND I&apos;M
SURE I&apos;LL HAVE MORE TO SAY NEXT
MONTH TOO.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR YOUR
TIME AND YOUR SERVICE TO THE
COMMISSION AND WE WILL MISS
YOU.
BUT WE&apos;LL GET TO SEE YOU NEXT
MONTH.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER COMMUNICATIONS OK
,ANY AGENDA ITEMS FOR NEXT
MONTH?
AND AGAIN, THIS IS A CHANCE
JUST TO SORT OF LIKE THROW THE
IDEA OUT THERE.
WE WOULDN&apos;T WE DON&apos;T HAVE TIME
TO TALK ABOUT ANY SPECIFICS
RIGHT NOW.
SOME THINGS WE&apos;VE GOT COMING UP
OUR BUDGET UPDATE VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION UPDATE MAIN
STREET RECONFIGURATION
SUBDIVISION&apos;S TRACK WHICH HAS A
SURVEY OUT RIGHT NOW THAT&apos;S A
RELEVANT COMMUNICATION.
THERE&apos;S A SURVEY OUT RIGHT NOW
ABOUT EXPANDING THE CYCLE TRACK
ON DIVISION AND ALSO CARRYING
OVER THAT DISCUSSION ABOUT
COUNCIL PRIORITIES THAT WE
DIDN&apos;T END UP DOING THIS MONTH
.
OK, OUR NEXT MEETING IS
SCHEDULED FOR WEDNESDAY, APRIL
20TH AT SEVEN PM AND IT WILL
ALSO BE A VIRTUAL MEETING.
SO IF THERE ARE OBJECTIONS WE
WILL ADJOURN TONIGHT&apos;S MEETING
NOT SEE ANY OBJECTION.
SO THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANKS SO MUCH EVERYONE.